---
author: Ian
timestamp: 19:41:54
title: Eight legs good, two legs bad!
---
Along with a lot of other people, I'm a big fan of cephalopods.  I've
dived with squid and cuttlefish and have watched octopus while
snorkelling.  I particularly remember following one cuttlefish across
a reef in the Philippines, watching its mesmerising pattern display,
until it got bored of the clumsy and noisy thing with too few
appendages plodding along behind it and made off for deeper water.

Octopus, in particular, are smart little critters.  One of the saddest
things I've ever read was a section of a book about octopus
physiology[^1] that talked about the effect of certain nervous system
lesions on the behaviour of octopus -- these were lesions induced by
human experimenters, of course.  The writer talked about how the
cephalopod victims cowered at the back of their tanks and clearly were
less than keen on being used as experimental subjects.  It stuck in my
mind as the only place in the book (otherwise a good and thorough
treatment of octopus physiology) where the author seemed tempted in
any way to anthopomorphise or to ascribe emotions or feelings to the
octopus.  That's why *Octopus vulgaris* is the only invertebrate
protected under the UK's animal experimentation laws...

Anyway, octopus are very cool and a fascinating model for non-human
(and non-vertebrate!) intelligence.  A [recent article][article] in
*Orion* magazine does a great job of getting across just how amazing
these creatures are.  Go and read it.  If they lived a bit longer and
could be trusted not to molest the dog, I would love to have an
octopus to live with us.  Alas, I don't like to imagine what would be
the result of Winnie versus a Pacific giant octopus.  Messy, for sure.

[^1]: I *really* like octopus, OK?  I think the book was *Octopus:
      physiology and behaviour of an advanced invertebrate* by
      M. J. Wells, although it was a while ago that I read it.

[article]: http://www.orionmagazine.org/index.php/articles/article/6474/
