---
author: Ian
tags: past-lives
published: 2012-01-23 20:47:59
title: Ping
---
For a brief period some years ago, I worked for an engineering firm
that did sonar work for the (UK) navy.  Many of the people in the
company were ex-submariners, who had served both on the
Swiftsure/Trafalgar attack boats and on the Vanguard missile boats.
These were all pretty solid people, and I remember one in particular
who delighted in telling stories about his time working his way up
from a "baby sailor" to naval attaché to the British embassy in
Washington, D.C.  His most amusing tales included a reenactment (with
actions) of the joys of carrying soup tureens around crowded
submarines, and the entertaining ability of US spy satellites to dip
into the atmosphere to take a closer look at interesting sights, like
Soviet mini-subs stuck on their motherships in their pens.

A slightly less amusing story revolved around the hubris of submarine
commanders.  He sent some of us a photograph showing £20 million of
towed sonar array snarled up around a mooring buoy, all because the
sub commander couldn't be bothered to wait for the divers to help
reeling the thing in.  A sad navy man with a big beard stood gazing at
the pile of expensive spaghetti, looking like he might burst into
tears at any moment.  Not the navy's finest moment.

One of my main jobs was to work on sonar system performance measures,
which were used by the Ministry of Defence to try to ensure that they
weren't being diddled by the main contractor for the sonar system in
question.  Terrifyingly large amounts of money were involved, and some
terrifyingly bad engineering decisions.  The contractor decided to
"buy British" for microprocessors for the beamforming hardware and
designed a system using the Inmos Transputer.  Oops.  Inmos were
assimilated into SGS Thomson, the Transputer shortly thereafter became
extinct, and a sharp about-turn was needed to redesign the whole
processing chain to use off-the-shelf PC components instead of the
custom hardware that they had planned for.

It was an interesting little period for me, though I hadn't wanted to
work on the naval side of things.  The company also did a lot of
aerospace work, and I had nominally been hired to work on that.  The
structure of the company meant that I got poached for sonar stuff, got
grumpy and left.

This company did have one extremely good thing they did though, one
that I've not yet seen anywhere else (although it may be a standard
approach in some kinds of engineering companies).  All of the details
of all non-classified projects that the company had going, in all of
the fields where it worked, were available for perusal via the
company's accounting and time tracking software.  Each engineering
employee kept track of the time they spent on whatever projects they
were assigned to (no surprises so far), but it was also possible to
look through any other projects, see what work remained to be done, to
see who was assigned to do the work, to see any open slots where
people with particular skills were needed, and if you had spare time,
to put yourself down to do that work.  It was a very efficient system,
and it actively encouraged people to talk and cooperate across project
boundaries within the company.  I think that was probably one of the
biggest lessons I took from my time there.  That, and, if you have
1500 m of towed array to reel in, wait for the divers...
