---
author: Ian
tags: mathematics
timestamp: 20:24:15
title: Minds and mathematics
---
In 1998, the mathematical physicist David Ruelle wrote an odd little
article, entitled *Conversations on Mathematics with a Visitor from
Outer Space*, which appeared as a chapter of the very interesting
looking book *Mathematics: Frontiers and Perspectives*, published by
the IMU in 2000.  I've not read the whole volume, although I think
I've read at least one of the other chapters as a preprint.  Most of
the 30 authors seem to have written more or less "straight" articles,
but Ruelle's is different.  He wanted to explore the constraints
imposed on human mathematics by the structure and capabilities of the
human brain.  Perhaps *constraints* is too strong a word --
"predispositions" might be better: human mathematics is necessarily
tied to human brains, and human brains have evolved to their current
state to solve problems that are quite different from the problems
encountered in mathematics.  One might thus expect human mathematics
to have followed the "fault lines" in the Platonic edifice of
Mathematics that are most easily appreciated using the mental tools
that evolution has given us.

To explore this idea, Ruelle introduces the conceit of a visitor from
outer space, a "galatic mathematician" pursuing doctoral studies
investigating the nature of human mathematics.  She describes some of
the characteristics of the human mental apparatus that are relevant:
limited short-term memory, and hence inability directly to execute
complex algorithms; predisposition to see symmetry and pattern; human
brains operate very slowly, even compared to human computers; the
importance of geometrical and visual reasoning; and so on.  Ruelle
comments that despite our limitations, humans have managed to do some
fairly complex mathematics, but the question is always: how much
further could we go if we could transcend the limitations of our
history?

<!--MORE-->

Ruelle's visitor tells him that it would be impossible for her to
explain Galactic Mathematics, since galactic mathematicians have
already undergone this transcendence: "an ancient civilization would
have fixed such intellectual inadequacies by assisted coevolution,
biological engineering, and so on".  Humanity must necessarily do the
same if they are to go beyond Human Mathematics.

This reminded me very strongly of an after-dinner talk by Freeman
Dyson at a conference at Caltech I attended some years ago.  The
conference was about the exploration of Mars[^1], and Dyson's chosen
topic was, naturally enough, the human exploration of space.  The main
point of his talk, as I remember it, was that he didn't think that
humans would get all that far into space.  At least, not humans as we
are now.  Too much effort expended on life support, too much danger
from radiation or extended periods of weightlessness.  Would it not
make much more sense, he asked, for us to modify ourselves for life in
outer space?  Not overnight, of course, since such a process would
involve a long period of experimentation and gradual adaptation, but
eventually the idea would be to have people able to survive life in a
weightless environment, with better resistance to ionising radiation,
and perhaps even limited ability to survive in vacuum.

And if we might do that to travel and live in outer space, why not
follow a similar process to allow us to explore the further reaches of
mathematics?  If arithmetic was no longer a question of rote learning
but just came naturally, if complex symbolic manipulations were
"obvious" instead of a lottery of sign errors, transpositions and
copying slip-ups, if complex logical arguments flowed effortlessly at
first sight, what might mathematics feel like to us, and how might it
feel to be freed from the bondage of our (relatively) plodding squishy
brains?  What sort of mathematics would be produced by an entity for
whom, for instance, the classification of finite groups could be held
in the mind's eye like a gem to be rotated and admired from every
angle?

Of course, it's pretty useless to speculate what it would be like to
be such an "extended" mathematician: not so different from the
archetypal example of imagining what it might be like to be a bat,
although perhaps more like the bat imagining life as a human.
Nevertheless, thinking about "extended" or modified human intellects
is tied to another topic I've been idly thinking about recently,
mostly as a follow-on from the Stanford AI course.  That's the
question of "common sense".  I'll write about that another time.


[^1]: At the time, I was a PhD student in Oxford, working on the
      ill-fated Mars Climate Orbiter mission.  This was the infamous
      "metric vs. imperial" screw-up, which put paid to that PhD
      project quite handily.  I had better luck second time out, a
      long time after this.
