---
author: Ian
title: "Non-diffusive atmospheric flow #3: reanalysis data and Z500"
tags: data-analysis
published: 2014-08-29 12:13:38
---

In this article, we're going to look at some of the details of the
data that we're going to be using in our study of non-diffusive flow
in the atmosphere.  This is still all background material, so there's
no Haskell code here!

<!--MORE-->

### Reanalysis data

In the last article, we talked blithely about looking at "patterns" in
the atmosphere.  By "patterns", we mean patterns of atmospheric flow
-- for example, we might be interested in looking at differences
between times when the normal conditions of westerly winds over the
North Atlantic prevail and times when those conditions are interrupted
and the winds are doing something else (those two states are
associated with different kinds of weather over Northern Europe).  The
easiest way to think about these spatial patterns is by thinking of
the isobars (lines of constant pressure) on a conventional weather
map, the kind of thing you might see on the news.  This plot shows
daily mean sea level pressure over the North Atlantic for 1 January
2014, showing a low pressure system just south of Iceland.  The
contours are labelled in hPa (i.e. 100 Pascals), which correspond
pretty closely to the more "traditional" units of millibars (1000 hPa
&asymp; 1000 mb):

<br>
<div class="img-center">
<a href="slp-map.png">![SLP map](slp-map.png)</a>
</div>
<br>

Because of the rotation of the Earth, in the Northern Hemisphere the
winds flow anticlockwise around regions of low pressure, clockwise
around regions of high pressure, and are stronger in areas where the
pressure gradient is greater (i.e. where the isobars are closer
together).

But how do you even measure enough spatial points in the atmosphere to
make a smooth-looking map like this?  We can measure temperature,
rainfall and wind speed and direction at surface weather stations, but
they give just a few point measurements (and they're very unevenly
distributed around the globe).  We can use instruments on satellites
to measure some quantities, although getting from what the instruments
measure (basically visible or infra-red radiation in different
frequency bands) to the quantities of interest is very difficult and
is a whole data analysis problem of its own.  Even then, you only get
direct measurements below the satellite's orbital track.  For a
satellite in a polar orbit, that means (more or less) two measurements
per day at each point on the globe.

To produce a global picture requires something more.  The "something
more" is usually a *model* of what's going on.  If you have a good
computational model of a system, it's possible to use a technique
called *data assimilation* to combine measurements and modelling to
get a "best guess" view of the state of the system.  In the case of
the atmosphere, numerical weather prediction models have reached a
pretty high state of sophistication and most of the large national
weather centres use one of these models combined with as much
satellite, ground and other observational data they can get their
hands on, in order to produce an "analysis" state of the atmosphere.
Here, "analysis" basically means *best guess of the current state
given what we know from the past, what our model tells us and what
observational data we have up to this point in time*.

And this is where we get the data we're going to use.  There are a
couple of *atmospheric reanalysis* projects, which try to take the
best models we currently have and *all* the historical observational
data of various kinds that are available and of high enough quality,
in order to produce a historical "reanalysis" of the state of the
atmosphere at any given time.  This historical reanalysis is not an
exact picture of the state of the atmosphere over time for a host of
reasons.  Some variables are intrinsically hard to predict, like
rainfall.  Some other variables are influenced by strong
nonlinearities, both in the atmosphere itself (tropical convection is
a good example) and in the interaction between the surface and the
lower regions of the atmosphere (the difference between the
reflectivity of sea ice and open ocean is a big one here).  And other
problems are caused by the finite spatial and temporal resolution of
the model used.  In any case, the reanalysis gives a fairly accurate
representation of the state of the atmosphere, better than could be
achieved by modelling or isolated observations alone.

The [reanalysis data we're going to use][ncep] is generated by the
National Centers for Environmental Prediction and the National Center
for Atmospheric Research (NCEP/NCAR).  It covers the period from 1948
to the present day and contains dozens of atmospheric and surface
variables.


### The geopotential height and $Z_{500}$

The plot above shows the sea level pressure, but we're going to use a
slightly different variable for our analysis.  For a given pressure
$p$, the *geopotential height* at pressure $p$, denoted $Z_p$, is the
altitude (which we'll measure in metres) of the surfaces of constant
pressure $p$.  In particular, we'll be concentrating on $Z_{500}$, the
geopotential height at 500 mb (millibars, which is about the same as
500 hPa: most people switch back and forth between the two units
without even worrying about conversion factors too much).

Let's think a little bit about why this is an interesting variable to
look at.  Atmospheric pressure at sea level is about 1000 millibars,
the exact value depending on the state of the atmosphere.  So 500
millibars is about half-way up the atmosphere, from the surface to the
vacuum of space, as measured in pressure coordinates.  At an altitude
of $Z_{500}$ (which is usually a little above 5000 m) , where the
pressure is 500 mb, half of the atmosphere by mass is below and half
above.  This is an interesting level for three reasons.  First, it's a
level above where most of the "weather" happens.  Second, although
changes at this level tend to reflect weather-like phenomena, the
details tend to be smoothed out spatially, allowing us to take a
larger-scale view of the spatial patterns in the atmospheric flow.
Finally, it's an interesting level simply by virtue of being "half way
up".

Here's a plot of the $Z_{500}$ field for the North Atlantic from 1
Janurary 2014, the same day as that for which the top figure shows the
sea level pressure (the contours are labelled in metres):

<br>
<div class="img-center">
<a href="z500-map.png">![Z500 map](z500-map.png)</a>
</div>
<br>

Think of a tank filled with two immiscible liquids of different
densities, oil and water say.  If we dye the bottom layer blue, we'll
be able to see what's going on more clearly.  If we tip the tank back
and forth a little, we'll be able to excite waves on the top surface
of the top liquid layer, but we'll also see waves on the interface
between the two liquid layers.  Although it's only a weakish analogy,
you can think of the disturbances we can see in the $Z_{500}$ field as
being a little like those interfacial waves.  (The analogy is weak
because of what happens at the top surface: the atmosphere doesn't
have one!)

Comparing the SLP and $Z_{500}$ plots, you can see more or less the
same features in the pattern of atmospheric flow (remember that the
pressure distribution says something about the winds, so it really
does make sense to speak of this as a pattern of atmospheric "flow").
In places where the sea level pressure is lower, the 500 mb
geopotential height level is depressed -- you can think of this as
there being less "total atmosphere" over a particular sea level point,
which means "half way up" isn't as high.  Some of the details in the
sea level pressure plot are smoothed out in the $Z_{500}$ plot,
demonstrating the larger-scale structure that the $Z_{500}$ field
captures.  For instance, the isolated high pressure area over eastern
Greenland visible in the sea level pressure plot is smoothed out in
the $Z_{500}$ plot.

So, $Z_{500}$ is the variable we're going to look at.  In the next
article, I'll show you some of the features we can see in this field
in the NCEP reanalysis data set, which will help to make it a little
clearer why this is going to be a useful thing to do.

[ncep]: http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/data/reanalysis/reanalysis.shtml
