---
author: Ian
tags: day-job,remote-sensing,science
timestamp: 21:17:18
title: Land cover datasets
---
In my day job, I work on the ecology of Mediterranean ecosystems in
southern France, and if you work on a particular type of ecosystem,
the first thing you need to know is where you can find your ecosystem!
Seems like a simple problem, but it's not.

<!--MORE-->

How might we start?  Go out and take a look?  That's fine, as far as
it goes, but it's labour-intensive and it can be tricky to compare
manual observations from different time periods for changes in land
cover.  We'll come back to that in a minute.  What about aerial
photos?  They're available for many regions of the globe, and they've
been around a lot longer than satellite data.  Here's an aerial photo
of a small region (about 8.5 km by 7 km) near an experimental station
we have at [Pu√©chabon][frpue] in the Languedoc-Roussillon region of
southern France, about 30 km from Montpellier.

<div class="img-full" style="width: 45%; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;">
<a href="aerial-photo.png">![Aerial photo](aerial-photo.png)</a>
<p style="text-align: center;">
*IGN aerial photo*
</p>
</div>

We can see a river, roads, some fields (easy to spot both because of
their colour and their geometry), some areas that look less vegetated
(the grey parts north of the fields), some parts that look more
vegetated (mostly around the greyer parts).  But can we tell which
areas are predominantly covered by *Quercus ilex* ([holm oak][qi])
woodlands?  That's a bit tougher.  Detailed examination of high
resolution images can be enough to identify vegetation assemblages,
but there's often just not enough information in a simple visible
light photograph (in the usual digital rendering, just three spectral
channels for red, green and blue) to pick out more subtle
differences.  And before the 1970s, most aerial photographs were black
and white, which makes things even harder.

For some regions of the world, there are in fact pretty good
inventories of the "go out and take a look" kind.  For France, the
[Inventaire Forestier National][ifn] (IFN) collects vegetation
inventory information for forestry applications.  Here's a plot of
their data for the same region as shown in the aerial photo:

<div>
  <div class="img2-box">
    <a href="ifn.png">![IFN example](ifn.png)</a>
    <p style="text-align: center;">*IFN inventory data*</p>
  </div>
  <div class="img2-box">
    ![IFN legend](ifn-legend.png)
  </div>
  <div class="img-spacer"/>
<div>

There's a pretty good correspondence between the units from the IFN
data and the units that are visible on the aerial photograph, which
lends some confidence to the classification that we see.  There are
three problems though.  First, this data has been developed for
forestry use.  There are large white "unclassified" areas where there
is no data, because there are no economically interesting trees there.
For some ecological applications, that's not much of a hindrance, but
it can be a problem for others.  Second, to understand what you're
seeing in a data set like this, you need to know quite a bit about the
survey method used for the inventory and the statistical methods used
to interpolate to a map view.  For the IFN data, this is well
documented, which makes the data relatively easy to use, but that
level of documentation is more the exception than the rule.  And
finally, this data is difficult to collect: a ground-based survey of
the entire country requires a lot of resources and so it can't be done
all that often.  (For some reason, Spain does very well in this
regard.  They have really good forestry data collected on a regular
basis across the whole of the country.  Good for them!)

What about some combination of aerial photography and ground-based
observations to serve as some sort of reference?  This is a good
approach in many cases: it allows for a more reasonable use of
resources for surveying, and it can produce new data sets as new
aerial photography comes in.  I use two different data sets of this
type, both produced in broadly similar ways, called CORINE (which
covers the whole of Europe) and OCSOL (which covers only the
Languedoc-Roussillon and [PACA][paca] regions of southern France).
Both of these data sets use ground-based observations with
contemporaneous aerial photography to construct sets of rules for
classifying land cover types from photographs.  The rules tend to be
quite complicated, relying on both basic spectral data (trees are
green, water is blue, rock is grey, that sort of thing), geometric
classification (fields tend to have square boundaries, rivers are
roads are mostly linear features, and so on) and a combination of the
two, possibly with other factors (greenhouses are squarish shiney
things that often appear in regular groups).  Along with some
ancillary rules to control the geometry of the resulting data set (no
near singular triangles, for example), this provides a system for
going from aerial photographs of a region to a data set of polygons
classified by land cover type.  So how well does it work?  Both CORINE
and OSCOL use more or less the same classification scheme, with the
following classes:

<div class="img-full">
  ![CORINE/OCSOL legend](corine-ocsol-legend.png)
</div>

and here is what the data looks like for the same region as shown in
the aerial photo and the IFN data above:

<div>
  <div class="img2-box">
    <a href="corine.png">![CORINE example](corine.png)</a>    
    <p style="text-align:center;">*CORINE land cover*</p>
  </div>
  <div class="img2-box">
    <a href="ocsol.png">![OCSOL example](ocsol.png)</a>    
    <p style="text-align:center;">*OCSOL land cover*</p>
  </div>
</div>

Hmmm...  Not so awesome.  Land cover units in the data sets don't bear
a strong resemblance to the land cover units you can see in the aerial
photograph, and they don't correspond all that closely to the
vegetation units in the IFN data (which is probably closer to the
"truth", since it's survey-based everywhere, while the CORINE and
OCSOL data uses rules calibrated in some parts of the region of
application to determine land cover type in other parts of the
region).

For a further comparison, we can think about what sort of remote
sensing products we might try to use to determine the land cover
type.  With remote sensing data, we have a good chance of getting a
regular time series of data (annual land cover maps from MODIS, for
instance), which is harder to get via any other method.  The downside?
Spatial resolution is pretty terrible, and classification accuracy is
patchy.  Here's the MODIS data for 2006 (same year as the CORINE data
and the aerial photo) for the region we're looking at:

<div>
  <div class="img2-box">
    <a href="modis.png">![MODIS example](modis.png)</a>
    <p style="text-align: center;">*MODIS land cover*</p>
  </div>
  <div class="img2-box">
    ![MODIS legend](igbp-legend.png)
  </div>
  <div class="img-spacer"/>
<div>

The spatial resolution here is about 500 m, compared to about 25 m for
the IFN data and whatever you want to believe for the CORINE and OCSOL
vector data sets (their resolution is defined in terms of the minimum
area of land cover feature that they include, rather than a regular
grid-based resolution limit).  It's actually very unfair to compare
MODIS data to data produced by land-based surveys, but we don't really
care too much about fair in this game: we just want good data.

Let's look at a comparison between some of these data sets in a
slightly more quantitative way.  Eyeball is fine, but just how bad
*is* the correspondence between these different data sets?  Let's
compare CORINE with MODIS first.  Gaze at this technicolour horror for
a few seconds:

<div class="img-full">![CORINE/MODIS comparison](CORINE_MODIS_2006.png)</div>

What this is showing is, in the vertical bar on the left, the overall
classification across the whole of the Languedoc-Roussillon region,
according to CORINE, and in the main part of the plot, how the portion
of the land surface in each of those CORINE classes was classified
according to the MODIS data.  If we take a look at the two most common
CORINE classes, broad-leaved and coniferous forest, we see that these
are mostly, but not exclusively, classified as forest in the MODIS
data, but there's quite a lot of mixing of classifications between the
different forest types.  The same kind of phenomena is seen in the
other classes: areas classified as urban by CORINE are about 50%
classified as urban in the MODIS data and about 50% something else.
One possible complaint about this comparison is of a resolution
mismatch between CORINE and MODIS: the CORINE data is a vector data
set with pretty high spatial resolution, while the MODIS data is on a
500 m grid (more or less).  We can do a similar comparison between
CORINE and OCSOL though, both of which are vector data sets, though
OCSOL has a smaller minimum area for land cover units it will
consider.  Here's the same sort of comparison plot as for the
CORINE/MODIS comparison:

<div class="img-full">![OCSOL/CORINE comparison](OCSOL_CORINE.png)</div>

The comparison is a little easier here, since CORINE and OCSOL use
more or less the same classification so we can use the same colour
scales.  That means that blocks in the main part of the plot that are
the same colour as the bars in the left hand part of the plot are
classified consistently between the two data sets.  Even though these
methods ostensibly use similar methods to classify land cover, the
correspondence between the two data sets is not great.  For instance,
of the area that is classified as coniferous forest by OCSOL, only
about 40% is also classified as coniferous forest by CORINE.

So, what do we do?  It's difficult to come up with any concrete
recommendations that aren't very tightly tied to specific
applications, since everyone's detailed needs are different.  For my
work, I'm most interested in assemblages including *Quercus ilex*,
*Quercus pubescens*, *Pinus halepensis* and shrub species that can be
bundled up into a generic "garrigue" classification.  For the
individual tree species, the IFN data is very good.  For identifying
garrigue sites, it's a bit less good, so I use OCSOL for that.  The
same goes for grasslands, when I need them.

It's a bit daunting that what would appear to be the simplest possible
remote sensing/geostatistical data question, that is "What's there on
the ground?" turns out to be so difficult to answer.  The geography
and history of this part of France does make the disposition of land
cover particularly complex, but something like this problem is going
to be encountered more or less anywhere in the world.


[frpue]: http://maps.google.com/maps?q=Pu%C3%A9chabon,+France&hl=en&ie=UTF8&ll=43.717272,3.617249&spn=0.06098,0.131578&sll=37.0625,-95.677068&sspn=66.828216,134.736328&vpsrc=6&hnear=Pu%C3%A9chabon,+H%C3%A9rault,+Languedoc-Roussillon,+France&t=h&z=14
[qi]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quercus_ilex
[ifn]: http://www.ifn.fr/
[corine]: http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/clc-2006-vector-data-version
[ocsol]: http://www.data.siglr.info/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout=blog&id=2&Itemid=8
[paca]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Provence-Alpes-C%C3%B4te_d%27Azur
