---
author: Ian
tags: past-lives
timestamp: 20:14:13
title: Past Lives: Part III Maths
---
I've been very lucky so far in my life, and have had many
opportunities to work and study in interesting places.  I'm not sure
I've made the best use of those opportunities -- there's much that
feels unfinished or that didn't quite work out the way I'd hoped it
would -- but these "past lives" have given me a lot of experience
working in different fields, living in different places, hanging out
with different kinds of people.

Blogging is inherently self-indulgent: you have to assume that someone
out there is interested in reading your maunderings.  (Not really.
Honestly, I do this for my own amusement.)  The ultimate in
self-indulgence has to be autobiographical blogging and reminiscing,
where some old fart bends everyone's ear about the "good old days".
Anyway, since this is for my own amusement and for a bit of writing
practice, I don't really care.  I'm going to be brazenly
self-indulgent and start writing "Past Lives" articles to see if I can
dredge up any interesting memories.

<!--MORE-->

In October 1997, I went to Cambridge to spend 9 months at DAMTP[^1] to
do the course that's generally called Part III Maths, although it has
the official title of the Certificate of Advanced Study in
Mathematics.  It's a taught masters' in mathematics, where you can
choose from around 100 different courses on all aspects of maths (pure
and applied).  It's examined at the end, and has a reputation as being
one of the harder mathematics courses in the world.

It's also used as a gatekeeper to determine who is offered maths PhD
places in Cambridge.  I went to Cambridge fresh from a stint in the
delightful world of international finance[^2], all bright-eyed and
bushy-tailed with the idea of doing a PhD in theoretical particle
physics.  Which meant that I needed to work hard and do well to have
any chance of getting a studentship.

Part III is a funny sort of course.  Cambridge undergraduates can do
it as an optional fourth year of the standard undergraduate maths
programme, but people also come in from outside to do it (like me).
It's very much a sink or swim affair.  The courses are hard, the exams
are harder, and there's little or no pastoral guidance or help.  Go to
lectures, sit at home thinking hard and doing maths, go to tutorial
classes, rinse and repeat (possibly with a pub visit or two in there
somewhere).  The lecturing ranges from the abysmally poor (no
names...) to the very very good (Peter Goddard lecturing on conformal
field theory sticks out as being one of those[^3]), no prisoners are
taken, and you quickly get the impression that you're surrounded by
some very smart people indeed.

I mostly took courses in theoretical physics (quantum field theory,
general relativity, elementary particle physics and group theory, more
quantum field theory, conformal field theory, plus some other stuff
that I don't remember any more).  Mostly it was fun, and I learnt a
lot.  Some of it was less fun, and I got quite seriously turned off
the idea of a particle theory PhD.  I think the straw that broke the
camel's back was talking to one of a PhD student who proudly showed me
a six-inch stack of paper that was his work for the last couple of
months.  A single calculation.  He described to me what it was about,
and I understood perhaps 10% of what he said.  "Could it be real?" I
asked.  "Oh no -- no way.  Definitely not real.  Just a thought
experiment.  Just something that hadn't been worked out."  And there
was the rub.  At that time, and maybe still, the life of a student
wasn't likely to be much more than filling in corners left by the big
names.  Now, I can look back and recognise that that wasn't
necessarily a bad approach to take for PhD students: they get to learn
about the subject on a well-constrained problem, a problem with a
definite end-point that's attainable in three years.  At the time
though, it seemed pretty uninspiring, so I kicked back and didn't work
terribly hard for the rest of the year, then lit out for Oxford to
work on remote sensing of the atmosphere of Mars...

In retrospect, Part III Maths for me served as a good interregnum, a
short period between working and starting as a PhD student.  It was
also a period where I went through big changes in my personal life,
splitting up with a long-term girlfriend (fianc√©e at that time), with
all the trauma that that entailed.  I wasn't really in the right frame
of mind to truly benefit from the teaching offered in Cambridge at
that point, but it was still useful experience.  I still don't know
what the $L$s are though.

[^1]: Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics.

[^2]: Some of my worst jobs ever.

[^3]: I sat next to a guy called Dave in this course.  In about the
      third lecture, Goddard introduced a set of operators called the
      $L$s.  We didn't quite understand what they were, which was a
      bit of a shame, since they appeared in almost every lecture from
      then on, leading us to ask each other on the way out of every
      lecture "Do you know what the $L$s are yet?".  (They're the
      generators of the Virasoro algebra, which is a bit like a Lie
      algebra for the funny infinite-dimensional symmetry group that
      crops up in two-dimensional conformal field theory.  There.
      That cleared it up for you, didn't it?)
