---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
title: Command and Control
published: 2014-07-08 10:24:59
---

*by Eric Schlosser*

My reading list recently has been chock-full of light-hearted and
mood-lifting material: some Irvine Welsh novels (always guaranteed to
shed a gentle light on all that's best about the human condition), a
long book about clinical depression, M. R. Carey's interesting
sort-of-zombie apocalypse/extreme mycology novel, *The Girl With All
The Gifts*, de Becker's *The Gift Of Fear*, a book all about fear and
violence, and Piper Kerman's prison memoir, *Orange Is The New Black*
(which did spoil the mood a little having a few sparks of hope in
among the gloom).

Among all this bleakness and blackness, *Command and Control* somehow
manages to stand out as a particularly grim monument to human folly
and our collective crimes against all sense and reason.  It's a book
about nuclear weapons, so it never really had much chance of being too
jolly, but even so, Schlosser's decision to focus in parallel on US
nuclear doctrine and nuclear weapons safety makes for some horrifying
reading.  It's something of a mystery how we made it through the Cold
War without either a "hot" war or at least some sort of unintended
detonation of a nuclear weapon.

<!--MORE-->

There are two main threads to the book.  The first is the development
of nuclear weapons and associated military doctrine in the US from the
Second World War to the present day (with limitations on what it's
possible to say about recent conditions because of classification).
Schlosser says little about Soviet weapon development and military
doctrine, mostly because the documentation on the Russian side needed
to write about this stuff just isn't available.  Most of the sources
used in *Command and Control* are US government materials declassified
relatively recently.

The second strand of the book is the story of the "Damascus Incident",
an accident involving a Titan II ICBM at a silo near Damascus, Kansas
in 1980.  A minor accident (a worker dropped a socket wrench during a
fuel tank repressurisation operation) eventually led to the missile
exploding, destroying the silo, killing one crew member involved in
trying to make the thing safe, and throwing the missile second stage
and the warhead into the air.  The warhead ended up in a ditch some
distance from the silo, outer casing broken, physics package exposed.
The nuclear components of the weapon weren't compromised and the
warhead was safed and removed the next day.

Schlosser does a *very* good job of conveying the number of moving
parts involved in an incident like this.  I've read some reviews of
*Command and Control* that complain that the description of the
Damascus incident is too fragmented and confusing.  It is fragmented
and confusing, but I think that's the point: when things go to shit
with an ICBM and there's potential for a 9 megaton thermonuclear
detonation, *hundreds* of people become involved very quickly, there
*is* confusion, desperately needed information just isn't available
(remember, this was in 1980: there's no internet, there are no cell
phones, the only way to find out what's going on in the silo is to
look at gauges in the control room; even now, I'm guessing that ICBM
silos are isolated -- you wouldn't trust that kind of thing even to
nominally "secret" networks).  If you wanted to give an exact and
detailed recitation of every significant event that occurred during
the incident, you'd do things differently, but to give a feeling of
the sense of confusion and panic surrounding an incident like this,
Schlosser's approach is just right.  It's also worth saying that
Schlosser interviewed a lot of people involved directly in the
incident, including members of the refuelling and command team in the
silo at the time and the disaster response team who arrived on the
scene later.  The details in *Command and Control* are almost
certainly accurate, and I think that Schlosser's presentation gives a
good feeling for the Fear, Uncertainty and Doubt that must go with
dealing with an accident like this.

But the Damascus incident isn't the most frightening nuclear accident
reported in the book.  That distinction has to go to an accident in
Goldsboro, North Carolina in 1961, when a B-52 bomber broke up in
mid-air, releasing a pair of nuclear bombs.  The only thing that
prevented one of the bombs from detonating was a simple low-voltage
switch -- the rest of the arming and detonation sequence ran as
expected, and if this single switch had tripped, there would have been
a 3.8 megaton detonation, killing everyone within a 25-kilometre
radius and spreading fallout across the whole of the eastern seaboard
of the United States.

One thing that comes across very strongly in all of this is the
resistance of the military to the addition of safety features to
nuclear weapons.  They were concerned only with making sure that
weapons went bang when they asked them to, not preventing them from
going bang when not required.  Given the almost ridiculously bad
consequences of even a "fizzle" of a nuclear weapon, that attitude
seems misguided at best.

In fact, the military doesn't come off too well in *Command and
Control*.  I used to hope that Dr. Strangelove was a product of
Kubrick's imagination, but it seems as though much of it has a basis
in fact.  Curtis LeMay, head of the Strategic Air Command (the part of
the US Air Force responsible for nuclear bombing) from 1948 until
1957, when he became Chief of Staff of the USAF, was in favour of
a preemptive nuclear attack on the Soviet Union.  Still, he was better
than his successor at SAC, Thomas S. Power, who sounds like a real
dick: "Putting aside all the fancy words and academic doubletalk, the
basic reason for having a military is to do two jobs -- to kill people
and to destroy the works of man".  I guess he wouldn't be so keen on
peacekeeping operations...

The ultimate insanity of American nuclear war planning was manifested
in the SIOP, the Single Integrated Operational Plan.  This was the
US's plan for a global thermonuclear war.  Once authorised by the
president, the process of the SIOP could best be described as "Kill!
Kill!  Kill!  Kill everything!  Kill *ALL* the everything!".
Schlosser quotes a number of people whose first indoctrination in the
SIOP left them reeling in horror.  These included well-known peaceniks
like Henry Kissinger and Richard Nixon.  The SIOP had no provisions at
all for limited war.  The president of the US would have to decide
within ten or fifteen minutes whether or not to launch a plan that
would kill millions of people.

Again, Schlosser does a good job of getting all this across.  He's
pretty level-headed about the way he approaches the subject, and
that's about all that you can do when confronted with this kind of
insanity.  If anything, the precise journalistic approach here only
heightens the sense of horror.  This is all *real*, it's all
documented, it was the way the world was for most of the second half
of the 20th Century.

From what I understand, nuclear weapons safety in the US is better
now, with much more sophisticated control mechanisms, an emphasis on
safety in weapon design and so on.  Unfortunately, the US doesn't make
the lessons it's learnt available to other countries because of
security concerns.  We also don't really know what the exact situation
is because more or less all information about nuclear weapons design,
deployment, strategy and so on is all classified.  The first we might
know about something going wrong is a Bright White Flash, as the
jargon goes.

Anyway, if you want some dark and bleak, *Command and Control* is
worth a look.
