---
author: Ian
tags: past-lives
timestamp: 18:48:49
title: PhD Attempt Number 1
---
I spent the period from October 1998 until November 2001 as a graduate
student in the atmospheric physics department in Oxford.  This all
started out swimmingly.

<!--MORE-->

The project I was working on was a space mission to remotely sense
water vapour in the atmosphere of Mars, using a novel infrared
radiometer on the Mars Climate Orbiter (MCO) spacecraft[^1].  I was
going to write software to perform retrievals of temperature and water
vapour profiles.  MCO was slated to arrive at Mars near the end of my
first year, so there would be *real data* to work on.  Exciting stuff.

The first year was great.  I learnt a lot of new and interesting
things about remote sensing and Mars, and started developing
algorithms and software.  I visited the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in
Pasadena, went to a conference at CalTech, and even won a departmental
prize for my first year report.  All very sweet.

A week or so before Mars Orbit Insertion, I went on holiday to the
Canary Islands with my girlfriend, where we explored the cloud forests
of Gomera, drank lots of cheap wine and stayed with some friends of
her family.  It was lovely and relaxing.  We got back to my
girlfriend's place in Brighton afterwards and settled down to read the
Sunday newspaper.  "Here, isn't this something to do with your work?"
she asked.  "'Mars mission lost', it says."  Uh-oh.  A quick phone
call to my supervisor revealed the gory details.  This was the famous
"metric-imperial mix-up" (it was more complicated than it sounded, but
that was no excuse) that resulted in MCO being steered into the planet
instead of into an orbit around the planet.  Everyone in Oxford was
*furious*, as this was the second time a version of this instrument
had been lost.

Back in Oxford, I pondered my future.  Friday lunchtime "planetary"
beers were somewhat legendary in the department, "lunchtime" often
stretching until about seven in the evening.  At least one respectable
visiting scientist had been discovered sleeping under a bench in the
University Parks on Saturday morning, having got "lost" and being
unable to find his way home or back to the department (the physics
department in Oxford is next to the University Parks).  This same
respectable scientist afterwards referred to the planetary group as
"animals" and refused to visit again.  Needless to say, MCO-related
sorrows were drowned and drowned again, with an additional toast or
two to send them on their way.

Everyone in the department was depressed about the turn of events, and
this led me to make a decision, that in the light of hindsight[^2],
was rather foolish.  I *could* have stuck with the work I was doing,
built an instrument simulator to generate synthetic data based on
likely Martian atmospheric profiles, finished developing retrieval
algorithms which I could have tested on the synthetic data.  The
result would have been a perfectly respectable PhD thesis.  That
seemed like a dull and unadventurous approach to take.  Oh, the folly
of (relative) youth.

Instead, I chose to switch projects (and supervisors).  I was going to
develop optical delay line hardware and associated control software
for a space interferometry mission.  When I think back on this
decision now, my reactions are something along the lines of "What?
What what?  What the *fuck*?".  It's easy to enumerate the ways in
which this was stupid: I had only a physics undergraduate's grasp of
optics and mechanical engineering, knew little about technical
drafting and next to nothing about actually making things, I hated
electronics as an undergraduate and had avoided it like the plague
ever since, there was no money to fund this "project", I had already
spent a year on learning all about Mars and all things Martian, as
well as having a lot of software already written for doing atmospheric
retrievals from the PMIRR instrument.  This was an idea that should
have been smothered in the cradle.

As it was, I didn't get very far.  First thing I needed was a platform
to test whatever delay line hardware I came up with.  That meant an
interferometer.  Did we have money to buy a nice off-the-shelf
metrology instrument?  No, we didn't.  My supervisor said, "Well, I
suppose you'd better make one then."  Right-oh.  High precision
machine shop work, optical system design, radio-frequency electronics,
data processing electronics.  What could possibly go wrong?

I accumulated piles of bits for an interferometer, most of which I
made.  I designed, built and tried to make work complicated
electronics.  (They never worked.)  At the end of three years, I quit
without a PhD and feeling pretty bitter about it all.

Despite that, looking back now, I don't feel as though those three
years were wasted.  The outcome was less than ideal, admittedly, but I
picked up an amazingly varied set of skills.  I spent a lot of time in
the workshop alongside people who really knew what they were doing, I
learnt a lot about CAD, I learnt more about electronics than I ever
really thought I wanted to know[^3].  None of these were things I
would have been exposed to otherwise.

Ten years later, part of me still wishes that I had had the good sense
to stick with the remote sensing project so I could get a nice quick
PhD and go and work for NASA.  But the greater part of me doesn't
regret anything.  Apart, perhaps, from some of those Friday "lunch"
outings.


[^1]: Anyone who has followed the sorry story of "The Curse Of Mars"
      already knows this isn't going to be pretty...

[^2]: Life needs a rewind button.

[^3]: I also bought a car from one of the electronics technicians for
      Â£150.  A car that then burnt to the ground in a service station
      in France on the way back from a kayaking trip to the Alps.  We
      had to pull all the boats and other gear from the burning car,
      then after the firemen had been and done their thing, I got a
      lift into Reims with the driver taking my car to the scrapyard,
      rented a van, drove my friends and all our gear to Dunkirk where
      I put them on the ferry, drove the van back to Reims, got a
      train to Calais, got the ferry to Dover, then the train back to
      Oxford.  John, the technician, hid from me for about a week
      after I got back, until he had been convinced that I wasn't
      going to beat him up...
