---
author: Ian
timestamp: 19:08:06
title: Link Round-up
---
Here's a rag-bag of entertaining things...

[Whatever: John Scalzi's blog](http://whatever.scalzi.com/)
<br>
John Scalzi writes entertaining science fiction books and is also an
all-round good egg.  His blog,
[Whatever](http://whatever.scalzi.com/), has been around since forever
(in internet terms).  Scalzi has a magic touch when it comes to
moderating comment threads: Whatever must be the politest place on the
internet, all without threats or banning or rudeness from John.
Scalzi's books tend towards the light and funny, but his blog posts
are sometimes more serious.  Here are a couple that really stray
dangerously close to thought-provoking:
[Being Poor](http://whatever.scalzi.com/2005/09/03/being-poor/),
[Things I Don't Have To Think About Today](http://whatever.scalzi.com/2010/10/18/things-i-dont-have-to-think-about-today/).

[Mathematical Fiction](http://kasmana.people.cofc.edu/MATHFICT/)
<br>
Yes, everything is there to be found on the internet.  Even a page
detailing more or less every work of fiction involving mathematics
even tangentially, scored for "Mathematical Content" and "Literary
Quality" (although they do need some graphs to show whether there's
any sort of correlation between these scores!).  There's some good
stuff on there, and it's quite interesting just to browse along the
"similar story" links to see where you end up.

[Structured Procrastination](http://www.structuredprocrastination.com/)
<br>
I've never been a fan of the *Getting Things Done* type of
self-help/self-organisation book, but John Perry, a philosophy
professor at Stanford, has what sounds like a perfect recipe for
making progress on all those tasks that get pushed aside in favour of
more interesting things.  The key idea seems to be to make a task list
with tasks at the top that you're never really going to do ("Write
novel."  "Learn Icelandic."  "Found religion.") then use your other
tasks as excuses to avoid these.  That way you can trick yourself into
actually doing things.  It sounds like a great way to go, and it fits
very nicely with the way that a lot of natural procrastinators already
work.  We don't do *nothing*, we just do something more interesting
and perhaps less important that what we're *supposed* to be doing...

[How Your Cat Is Making You Crazy](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/03/how-your-cat-is-making-you-crazy/8873/?single_page=true)
<br>
Finally, here is one of the freakiest things I have heard about for a
long time.  You think you have free will?  You think you're in control
of the decisions you take?  Maybe you should think again.  Rats
infected with the parasite *Toxoplasma gondii*, which they pick up
from cat faeces, exhibit a strange mix of behavioural changes, the
most striking of which is that they no longer fear cats.  Male rats
infected with *T. gondii* find the smell of cat urine sexually
exciting.  Result: infected rats get eaten by cats and the parasite
goes on its way to explore the next part of its charming life cycle.
Big deal, you say.  Who cares about freaky rats?  The big deal is that
*T. gondii* is a zoonose -- it infects humans too.  There's not a
perfect match between the parasite and human brains, since *T. gondii*
evolved to jump between cats and rats, but the parasite has enough
affinity for human grey matter to cause significant changes in
behaviour in some carriers.  It gets a little scary when you hear just
what those changes are.  One is increased recklessness (particularly
in males), leading to detectable differences in car accident
statistics for carriers compared to non-carriers.  Another is
schizophrenia, which shows strong correlations with *T. gondii*
status.  How weird is that?  A parasite that lives in cats and rats
may be at least partially responsible for one of the most mysterious
and terrifying of mental illnesses.  There is still a lot of work to
be done on this, but there are some serious people involved in the
research, and it sounds pretty solid.

For me, I guess there are two separate "whoah!" moments that come out
of this.  The first is about the power of evolution.  The coevolution
of parasites and their hosts is already strange, even before you get
to mind-altering parasitic cysts that make one of the parasite's
carriers more likely to be eaten by another.  I find it quite hard to
get my head around this: it's like the parasites are *farming* the
rats and cats (albeit unintentionally).  The second thing is the idea
that schizophrenia in humans may just be collateral damage in the
*T. gondii*/*Felis catus*/*Rattus norvegicus* arms race.  It would be
one thing for humans to suffer the by-blows of some cataclysmic war of
the gods, but these are cats, rats and protozoa!

If you want to get even more scary, think about the fact that
*T. gondii* is just one environmental parasite, one of the relatively
well-studied ones.  There might be dozens of other little suckers
shaping you to their ineffable monocellular will.  Still think you're
the one driving up there?
