---
author: Ian
tags: AI
published: 2012-01-30 20:06:22
title: Common sense and the well-designed child
---
I recently read an interesting article by John McCarthy that set me
thinking.  The paper is called *The Well Designed Child*[^1] and talks
a bit about about the old nature versus nurture debate: to what extent
is a newborn child a blank slate, and to what extent are human
intellectual capabilities intrinsic and instinctual?

To me, the whole question of nature versus nurture has always seemed
odd.  It's clear that both aspects are important.  We are all limited
to one extent or another in what we can do purely by the physical
parameters of our existence: as much as I would like to teleport
myself to Europa to frolic in the sunless sea beneath the ice, I
can't, and never will be able to.  Equally though, the potential that
exists in all of us at birth can be squandered, and without education
and opportunity, none of us can make of ourselves all that we might.
So, we need a bit of both.

Perhaps the source of the debate lies in observation of other
creatures: beavers don't go to Beaver Engineering School to learn how
to build dams, and spiders don't attend art college to learn how to
make beautiful webs.  These abilities are intrinsic, evolved, part of
what Richard Dawkins called the "extended phenotype" of these
creatures, behavioural manifestations of developmental and neural
structures that are passed down from generation to generation.  Humans
don't appear much like that.  We do have to go to school to learn how
to build dams or weave webs or to do any of the thousands of things
that we do.  The question then is: what intrinsic capabilities are we
born with?  What is on our slate, since it seems as though it ought
not to be completely blank?

Human babies don't seem all that capable, compared to the young of
other species.  That's something of an illusion though, since humans
give birth to developmentally very premature infants, mostly as a
result of evolutionary compromises to allow us to have large brains
combined with an upright posture.  I don't know exactly what human
developmental stage would be a good one to use for comparison with
other species, to try to decide what intrinsic capabilities we might
have.  However, there are three fairly obvious capabilities that do
spring to mind.  These are the capability to learn, the apparently
intrinsic facility for language acquisition, and a basic grasp of
what, for want of a better term, I'll call "folk physics".

The first two are aspects of human development that are quite well
known and explored, although none of the questions are yet really
settled, as far as I can tell.  I'd like to concentrate on the third,
this idea of "folk physics".  What do I mean by that?  I mean the kind
of common sense knowledge of the world of physical objects that we all
have -- two objects cannot occupy the same space; if one object passes
behind another, it does not cease to exist; objects further away
appear smaller; gravity gives a definite up-down orientation to the
world.  You can come up with lots more examples.  These things seem
almost too obvious to state, but they are still knowledge of a kind
that either has to be intrinsic or acquired, and they constitute a
large base of shared facts that we all need and use for living in the
physical world.

What McCarthy's paper really set me to thinking about though, was what
might minds be like that had different sets of common sense to our
own?  Uncommon sense, if you like.  A couple of examples will give an
idea of what I'm talking about.  First, think about an entity evolved
to live in vacuum, in a micro-gravity environment.  Human-default
common sense physics seems to be Aristotelian more than Newtonian, but
that's hard to imagine for a creature that never feels air resistance
and doesn't have a large local gravity field to give it a sense of up
and down.  Just for an example, how would such a creature refer to
directions?  No up and down may lead to no left and right either,
although near and far seem as though they should still be usable.
How about referring to directions towards items, rather than
abstracting into categories like up and down?  That might work, but it
would have a fundamental impact on the way that such entities might
use language to refer to each other and to objects and places.  It's
interesting to speculate what sort of idiomatic usage might arise from
this different perspective on the world.

Second, another example, more remote from human experience in many
ways.  What sort of common sense, and what sort of mind, might an
entity inhabiting a computer network (the internet, say) develop?
Here, there is no "physics", since there is no physical.  There are no
physical directions at all, although the environment has a rich
topological and metric structure.  The more I think about it, the more
I find myself at a loss to imagine what the existence of such an
entity might be like.  It led me to think that true artificial
intelligences, if we ever succeed in creating them, may be even
stranger than they are usually portrayed in fiction[^2].


[^1]: J. McCarthy (2008).  The well-designed child.  *Artificial
      Intelligence* **172**, 2003-2014.  Free online version
      [here](http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/child/child.html).

[^2]: Charlie Stross's intelligent lobster spam filters might be an
      exception here on the insufficient strangeness front...
