---
author: Ian
published: 2012-05-12 12:49:33
title: Holidays in Austria 1: Vorarlberg
---
<div class="img-right">
<a href="hittisau-mountains.jpg">![Mountains around Hittisau](hittisau-mountains-small.jpg)</a>
</div>

So, we've come to Austria on holiday for a month.  We drove from
Montpellier and stopped off in Vorarlberg in western Austria for a
couple of days of mountain climbing before coming here to Ravelsbach,
where Rita's parents live.

The drive from Montpellier through France and Switzerland was fine,
and Winnie was well-behaved.  We stayed in a village called Hittisau,
just over the border into Austria.  Navigation was no problem until we
actually reached the village itself, which probably has a population
of about 2000 people.  All of whom appear to be called Hagspiel, which
was the name of the family who owned the place we were staying.  It
took three goes and a phone call to other family members to locate
exactly *which* "Pension Hagspiel" we were booked into.  Confusion was
compounded when the people at the first place responded to Rita saying
"Hello!  We have a reservation for two days: we're the couple with a
dog." with "Are you sure?  The couple with the dog already arrived
this morning!".  Obviously a *different* couple with a dog arriving
the same day as us at a *different* pension owned by *different*
members of the same family...

Anyway, we found it in the end, and it was very nice.  We had a
kitchen and bathroom to ourselves, a big balcony and a view over the
valley.  We could see mountains from the bed, which is a requirement
for any future accommodation, according to Rita.

Winnie wasn't too impressed with all the *newness*, but she coped, and
soon found a way to let off some steam.  We went for a walk the first
evening, up to the Hagspiel's farm and through some fields.  There
were chickens and cows around and Winnie was very interested in
everything.  A moment of inattention from the idiot holding her leash
(that would be me) allowed her to discover a nice fresh cowpat to roll
in.  And not just a little dabble of cow poop either, but a full-on
shit somersault.  We knew that she liked to roll in horse poop (which
strangely enough, doesn't smell too bad on her fur), but we had been
speculating over whether or not cow pies would be just as appealing.
Question answered: yes they are.  First stop once we got back to the
pension was the bathroom where we dumped Winnie in the bath and
showered her off!

We had two days of really nice walking, the first day up Hittisberg,
which is the "Hausberg" of Hittisau and the second a loopy walk up
Gschwendalpe.  Both days were great, with warm sunny weather (courtesy
of the f√∂hn, we heard), steep climbing, lots of snow (it was the first
time ever that Winnie had seen snow, and it was a real treat -- she
loves to play in it, and was running around like she'd been on the
crazy cakes), and very few other people around.  We even had Victory
Beers in a meadow next to a little Gasthaus on the way back.

Evening entertainment was laid on by the neighbours down the hill from
the pension.  First night: oompah band until one in the morning.  Not
continuously, obviously.  The correct production of Austrian oompah
music requires copious lubrication, so there would be five minutes of
oompah, then a pause of 20 minutes or so (the length of time it takes
to down a beer, if one has an oompah-induced thirst on), then more
oompah.  Eventually the beer must have run out, because they all went
home and we could sleep the rest of the night in something more than
20 minute naps.  Second night: the local vintage tractor association
descended, with their roaring infernal machines of, perhaps, 1940s or
1950s vintage.  We saw them start to arrive as we were preparing
dinner and were on tenterhooks for the next half hour as we waited for
more of them and an accompanying oompah band.  Fortunately, only three
tractors (carrying about six people) and no oompah band turned up, and
they only stayed for an hour or so.

After two restful days (modulo oompah), we packed up to head east for
Lower Austria and Ravelsbach.
