---
author: Ian
tags: dogs
title: Back to School!
published: 2013-09-30 15:17:19
---

The last couple of weeks have been a bit of a shock to the system.
Rita went back to school two weeks ago, which meant that I went back
to walking Winnie a couple of times a day (not quite every day,
because Rita's schedule often has gaps, but certainly a lot more than
I'd done over the summer).  Of course, I wanted to keep on doing all
the other things I'd been doing: work (standing at my desk for 8+
hours per day), yoga (an hour or so every morning), circuit training
(3-4 times per week), running (4 times a week), and so on.

Anyone who wasn't an idiot would have seen where this was going.  I
was completely knackered by the end of the first week, was suffering a
bit from "being on my feet"-related malaise (pain while running, pain
while walking, pain while standing: oops).  Silly boy.

Anyway, I've had a bit of a break now and things are getting better.
I've had a few days off running, Rita has been walking Winnie over the
weekend, and I've been trying to be less of a muppet.

All that said, it was nice to get out with Winnie a bit again.  I did
about 110 km walking and running that first week, the best of which
was a walk up Patscherkofel on the Friday.  It was a lovely day and we
both had a great time.  We didn't go all the way to the top of the
mountain, just to the Patscherkofelhaus and back down (that's about
1100 metres above our house).  I hadn't been planning to go so far,
but when we got to Lanser Alm after an hour and a half, Winnie seemed
keen to head on up, so up we went!

We'll have to go up there again when we have another nice day and go
all the way to the top -- there's a really nice trail called the
Jochleitensteig that goes around behind the summit.  We've seen GÃ¤mse
there before, which was pretty cool.

Here are some pictures from by the Patscherkofelhaus.  Our house is
outlined in red in the first one (it's tiny: click on the image for a
bigger version so you can see it).

<div>
  <a href="view-1.jpg"><img src="view-1-small.jpg" style="width:24%"></a>
  <a href="view-2.jpg"><img src="view-2-small.jpg" style="width:24%"></a>
  <a href="view-3.jpg"><img src="view-3-small.jpg" style="width:24%"></a>
  <a href="view-4.jpg"><img src="view-4-small.jpg" style="width:24%"></a>
</div>
