---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
published: 2012-02-05 18:39:17
title: Red Plenty
---
*by Francis Spufford*

How do you make a book about central economic planning in the Soviet
Union into an entertaining page-turner?  You do what Francis Spufford
did with [Red Plenty](http://www.redplenty.com/Front_page.html), a
book that is almost impossible to classify, a mix of fact and fiction
and dramatised might-have-beens, plausible if not quite
verisimilitudinous[^1] narratives populated by a melange of real
historical personages and imagined characters.

It's not quite fiction, not quite history.  Some reviews that I've
read weren't comfortable with the changeling mood of the book, but I
thought it was great.  It's hard to bring to life the enormity of the
project, and subsequent events and the all too real lies and
corruption that surrounded much of what went on in the Soviet era have
obscured the visionary nature of the enterprise, but Spufford gets it
across through uncovering the motivations of some of the main actors.
[Kantorovich](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonid_Kantorovich) and his
colleagues really did want to make the world a better place, to
alleviate the suffering that they saw as arising from the unequal
distribution of wealth in market economies, and to use science and
mathematics to make the lives of ordinary working people more
pleasant.

Eventually, the project failed, for many reasons, but there was a
period in the 1950s where the expansion of the Soviet planned economy
genuinely had western economists and politicians worried.  The
stagnation of the Brezhnev era that followed had many causes, some
related to the failure to diversify the economy of the USSR beyond
heavy industry and basic agriculture, but the very real achievements
of the Soviet planners shouldn't be understated.  *Red Plenty* gives a
realistic and sometimes cynical portrayal of life in a system
supposedly based on equality and scientific planning where a word from
Khruschev over the telephone condemned a whole village of striking
workers to death.

The cynicism is brought into stark focus by the frequent use of
genuine Soviet era jokes throughout the book, all of them taken from
the [PhD thesis][jokes] of Seth Benedict Graham[^2].  Here's a typical
example:

> Yuri Gagarin's daughter answers the phone.  "No, mummy and daddy are
> out," she says.  "Daddy's orbiting the earth, and he'll be back
> tonight at 7 o'clock.  But mummy's gone shopping for groceries, so
> who knows when she'll be home."

A lot of research went into the book: the representations of daily
Soviet life feel very authentic, and the characters of some of the
historical personalities who appear are finely detailed.  Highly
recommended.

[^1]: A little like that word I just invented.

[^2]: I actually downloaded and read this.  The only Russian
      literature PhD thesis I have ever read.

[jokes]: http://etd.library.pitt.edu/ETD/available/etd-11032003-192424/unrestricted/grahamsethb_etd2003.pdf
