---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
title: North Korea: Nothing To Laugh At
published: 2013-12-05 20:40:04
---

I've read a couple of books about North Korea recently, neither of
which were much fun.  The first was *Nothing to Envy: Real Lives in
North Korea* by Barbara Demick.  This was interesting partially for
the "arm's length" approach that Demick had to take -- the only North
Koreans she could find to talk to were escapees from the Kim regime
living in the US or South Korea.  Despite those limitations, Demick
does a good job (as far as I can tell) of portraying the day-to-day
challenges of life in North Korea.  The most striking thing?  The
pettiness of the regime: the megalomania and the monuments to Kim p√®re
et fils is one thing, but the *Songbun* system of what sociologists
call
["ascribed status"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ascribed_status) is
almost biblical in its horror.  So your grandfather found himself on
the wrong side of the border at the end of the Korean War?  Tough
luck, sister, you're on the Dear Leader's shit list.  Three
generations dumped into the "hostile class".  Fuck yeah.  I'd be
hostile too.  No opportunities for employment, constant suspicion from
the authorities and the stooges they recruit from the population (who
can blame anyone for what they do in that sort of environment? any one
of us would probably end up being a stooge too if we could -- choice
is a luxury in North Korea), and the constant fear of incarceration
for one misspoken word.  And all the while, the Kims live in luxury
and mismanage the country into famine and destitution.  Demick's
description of the *kochebi*, "wandering swallows", homeless orphans
whose parents had died in the famine of the 1990s, is depressing as
hell.

The second book was *Escape from Camp 14: One Man's Remarkable Odyssey
from North Korea to Freedom in the West* by Blaine Harden.  I read it
after Demick's book, and it's of an entirely different order.  The
unwieldy title aside, it is just harrowing.  There are prison camps in
North Korea called "Total Control Zones".  Thousands of people are
born there, live there, die there, the children of the supposedly most
recalcitrant of the "hostile class".  Shin In Geun is the only person
known to have escaped from one of these camps.  He saw his mother and
brother executed, and was forced to be complicit in their
condemnation.  He never knew any kind of love or solidarity, was told
again and again that he was the lowest of the low.  He saw a little
girl in his school beaten to death by the "teacher" for nothing,
nothng at all.  The guards in the camp abused the inmates with
impunity.  He was told nothing of the outside world.  There was no
possibility of redemption or escape from the system of oppression into
which he was born.

And yet he escaped.  One of probably thousands who've tried.  Well, he
escaped physically.  Made his way through North Korea to the Chinese
border, then to South Korea, and then the US.  But escaped from the
sick system that shaped his childhood?  It doesn't sound so much like
it.  Although the South Korean government does a lot to try to
integrate refugees from the North, many have mental health problems or
just find it difficult to fit into a society that isn't based on
oppression, hatred and suspicion.  Shin is one of those.  I can't even
begin to imagine the psychological journey he's already had to make to
get from where he started to where he is today.

I guess the central message I drew from these two books is that the
North Korean regime is simply evil.  The Kims and their entourage do
live in luxury.  Their subjects (what other word would you use?) live
in poverty, fear and isolation from the rest of the world.

I have another book in the same vein to read now, *The Cleanest Race:
How North Koreans See Themselves And Why It Matters* by B. R. Myers.
I'm expecting this one to be just as much fun as the other two.