---
author: Ian
tags: science
published: 2012-02-16 20:09:15
title: Caterpillarpalooza!
---
<div class="img-right"><a href="caterpillar-1.jpg">![Caterpillars!](caterpillar-1-small.jpg)</a></div>

We saw something cool on the way to work this morning.  It turns out
that they're considered pests in this part of the world, but a five
metre string of nose-to-tail caterpillars counts as cool in my books
even if they *are* pests.  Apparently, these [little critters][wp] make
nests high in pine trees (we think we saw the nest -- looked like a
big ball of spiderweb), then troop down the tree and off into the
world to make caterpillary mischief of one sort or another.

We first spotted the caterpillar chain coming out onto the pavement as
we were walking up to Rita's office.  Keeping Winnie well out of the
way (Rita takes her to work a couple of days a week), since the
caterpillars are hairy and would be bad news for a little dog's nose,
we had a good look at what was going on.  The caterpillars really were
stuck nose-to-tail, wriggling their way along to who knows where.

Most of them were meeting a sad fate on the pavement, as they got
stepped on and squashed, so leaving a confusing pile of caterpillar
guts that led the caterpillars behind to make strange loops and knots
of themselves as they could no longer tell where to go.

<div class="img-left"><a href="caterpillar-2.jpg">![Still caterpillars!](caterpillar-2-small.jpg)</a></div>

We followed the trail of caterpillars inside the fence to the tree
they were coming from.  The trail stretched all the way through the
pine needle litter from the tree to the fence, a distance of about
three metres.  With the metre of caterpillars still coming down the
tree and the metre already on the pavement, that gives us five metres
of caterpillars, 500 centimetres.  Each caterpillar was about 2.5 cm
long, so we had about 200 individuals in this troop.

There's a (not very good) video [here](http://youtu.be/HTj-Sdd2DO4)
showing the extent of the procession.

Later on, walking home, we saw caterpillar remains in a couple of
other places along the road, suggesting that there were quite a few
processions that morning.  The caterpillars normally come out of their
nests together at night, to feed on pine needles, but they leave the
nest in the same way when it's time to pupate, so I guess that was
what we were seeing today.

[wp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pine_Processionary
