---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
timestamp: 19:11:30
title: Holiday Reading #1
---
I did a spot of reading over the Christmas and New Year holidays.  In
fact, reading was more or less all I did.  Apart from walking the dog,
spending time with Rita and eating myself silly.  I read enough to
write a lot of book review posts, but I'll restrain myself to three or
so...  First off, spy stories.

<!--MORE-->

I'd never read anything by John Le Carré, having once picked up
*Smiley's People*, read the first page, not liked the tone of the
narrative and so put it right down.  For some reason though, Amazon
insisted on recommending Le Carré's books to me, and I was tempted to
give them a go.  I read *Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy* then *The
Honourable Schoolboy*, which follows right on from Tinker Tailor.  I
still find the narrative voice uncomfortable.  The off-handedness of
some of the comments, the descriptions of characters, all make me
think of some establishment patrician type pronouncing from his
favourite chair in his Mayfair club.  On reflection though, the voice
makes perfect sense.  Much of the action is set in Whitehall, many of
the characters really are those old school tie types, and from that
point of view, the voice works.

And anyway, maybe it's supposed to make us feel uncomfortable.  The
atmosphere of Le Carré's books is one of claustrophobia and bleakness,
where no-one can truly be trusted, where betrayal and treason are the
bread-and-butter of the business.  Not a recipe for comfort.

I can't really say that I *like* Le Carré.  I understand why many do,
and I see a lot of value in his depiction of the Cold War and the
unlikely warriors who fought a large part of it.  But still.  The way
that the death of Jerry Westerby at the end of *The Honourable
Schoolboy* was reported gave the impression that the narrator really
didn't give a toss.  Par for the course in the intelligence services?
Maybe?  Le Carré ought to know, having worked for both MI5 and MI6.

Apparently, Le Carré himself listed Tinker Tailor as being one of his
four best novels.  Maybe I should read the other three on his list
(*The Spy Who Came In From The Cold*, *The Tailor Of Panama* and *The
Constant Gardener*).

In a similar, although different, vein is Anthony Price's *Other Paths
To Glory*, which I read on the recommendation of Charlie Stross, who
quoted it as an inspiration for some of the style of *The Fuller
Memorandum*.  I didn't really know what to expect.  I was wondering if
the title was a reference to Kubrick's *Paths Of Glory*, because of
the First World War connection, so wasn't quite in the mindset for a
1970s spy thriller.  However, it's a good read, and grabs hold very
quickly, with an entirely unexpected bit of violence and the
protagonist's reaction to it, perhaps borne more of shock than
anything else (having just been the victim of a quite professional
murder attempt, he's more worried what his mother will think of him
coming in dripping wet from being in the river...).  The historical
detail of the battlefields of the Somme feels nicely authentic, not
that I know anywhere near enough to comment on that, and the
connection to the present afforded by the visit of a tour group of
veterans works well.  The "mystery" at the heart of the plot isn't all
that mysterious, and it's a little surprising that none of the experts
were quite aware of it before the denouement of the action.

My last spy novel of the holiday was a more modern one, *The Tourist*
by Olen Steinhauer.  Of the four books described here, this one does
the best job of getting across the bleakness and moral ambiguity of
the whole spy game.  Milo Weaver is a "tourist" for the CIA,
travelling the world on the orders of a voice on the phone and
performing at best morally ambiguous tasks at the behest of his
masters in New York.  Burnt out and worn out, he's back at an office
job for the middle of the book, but is never quite able to leave his
Tourism behind him.  By the end of the novel, it's no longer very
clear who the good guys are.  Or if there ever were any.  The bad bad
guys are picked out fairly clearly (psychopathic paedophile Russian
oligarchs, anyone?), but apart from that, no-one has entirely clean
hands.  Weaver's (to be honest, rather unlikely) family history
eventually gets him out of a little pickle with home office, but he
ends up annoying enough people that he's demoted back to Tourist
status.

Not a cheerful book.  None of these four are.  They're all bleak and
amoral (*The Tourist* perhaps even more than the others), and it's
never quite clear which side we should cheering for.  In *The
Honourable Schoolboy*, one character explicitly, if briefly, mentions
this, commenting more or less that "Well, we are better than them,
aren't we?  Our system is better, isn't it?".  "Them" refers to global
communism, in the shape of the USSR and China.  The question of who
are *we* and who are *they* is even more obliquely treated in *Other
Paths To Glory* where it's never clear who the "heroes" end up
protecting from the "baddies".

I'd like to know just how accurate, in particular, is Le Carré's
depiction of the spying life.  I guess I'll need to wait some years
before records are declassified (if they ever are) so that someone can
write a definitive history of the Cold War...
