---
author: Ian
tags: sleep
published: 2012-12-26 11:11:08
title: "Polyphasic Sleep: Day 2"
---
Urgh.  Well, that didn't go quite as I was hoping.  I discovered that
I didn't much enjoy being awake on my own through the 16 hours of
darkness we currently have here.  Not as a habit anyway.  The
trade-off between the vistas of potentially infinite extra time and
feeling like a very slightly warmed-over turd in human form sent me
off to bed for a proper sleep at about 4:00 this morning.

I've not quite decided why this sucked as much as it did.  I could
definitely have forced myself to continue, even though I was feeling
shitty, but I just didn't want to.  There's obviously a barrier to
cross with this, to get the initial physical adaptation going, and I
think it may just be too difficult (for me, at least) to cross that
barrier in the depths of winter.  At the moment, it gets dark about
5:00 in the evening here and the sun comes over the mountain behind
our house just before 10:00 in the morning.

That's a lot of time without the sun.  I found it difficult to do
anything much active during the night -- I didn't feel like
exercising, and I didn't really fancy the idea of dragging Winnie out
for a walk.  We have a nice lighted collar for her, so there's no
safety issue with walking at night, but she was already confused
enough that I didn't want to make it worse.  (Last night, she spent a
lot of the night sitting on the sofa with me looking at me as if to
say "Ian, you do know that it's sleepy-time, don't you?  Can we do
some sleepy-time now?  Please?".  I felt sad.)  I also found myself
thinking a lot about the practicalities of this sort of sleep
schedule.  Rita and I often have some of our best talks late at night
in bed just before sleeping, and I really wouldn't like to give that
up.  On top of that, the prospect of having to organise life so as to
never be more than four hours from naptime seems a bit daft.

I might give it another go in six months, when the days are long
(about 7.5 hours more daylight than now!).  For now, I think I'll try
to do what I was originally planning, to switch to a sleep schedule
with a short 4-5 hour "core sleep" and one nap in the afternoon.  That
seems a lot more achievable.  Rita has been trying to sell me on the
benefits of napping for years -- she is well initiated into the Inner
Mysteries of the Church Of The Short Sleep -- maybe I should start
listening?

So, that all sounds quite pathetic.  Chapeau to anyone who can do this
for real, especially if they start off when it's dark and wintry.
