---
author: Ian
tags: yoga
title: Ashtanga Yoga
published: 2013-04-22 18:44:56
---
When we lived in Canada, we exercised a *lot*: mountain and road
biking, running, sea kayaking, CrossFit.  That dropped off in France,
but I managed to do some gymnastics and basic conditioning, which
continued for the first summer here in Austria (lots of gymnastics: I
even managed to do a few muscle-ups on my rings!).

Over the winter in Igls, I've not been doing a whole lot, partially
for lack of time (I keep telling myself that three hours of
dog-walking a day has to be worth *something*), partially for lack of
inclination, and partially because the pull-up bar is too cold to hold
onto in the mornings when it's -10&deg;C outside (that sounds like a
better excuse than "lack of inclination"!).  I'd been thinking for a
while that I needed to start doing something again, and Rita had a
yoga book lying around, so I thought I'd give that a go, if only for a
while.

I spent a few weeks doing a mixture of things out of this little book
and it was kind of fun, but I didn't really know where I was going
with it.  I was looking around for videos and websites one day, and I
found [Kino MacGregor's site][kino].  "Heh, that's funny," I thought.
"She looks more like a CrossFitter than anything else."

Kino has been doing Ashtanga yoga for fourteen years.  Ashtanga is
usually described as a "vigorous" style of yoga, which seems to mean
that it's excruciatingly hard, you sweat like a pig (even without that
wacky hot room that Bikram yoga uses...), and it will take you *years*
to be able to do some of the postures in the "Primary Series".  Sounds
like fun!

Convenience dictates that this is mostly going to be self-guided: the
likelihood of practising regularly is much higher if all that's needed
is to unroll your mat and start; getting on a bus into town to a class
is a bit of a barrier.  So, I ordered [some][swenson] [books][birch]
and made a plan.

So far, it's going pretty well.  I've been practising nearly every day
for three weeks and have built up to doing a bunch of Sun Salutations,
all of the standing postures and about half of the closing sequence.
The Ashtanga practice is made of four parts: two kinds of Sun
Salutations, a series of fundamental standing postures, either the
"Primary" or "Intermediate" series of seated postures, then a closing
sequence involving a mixture of backbends and inversions.  The
Intermediate series isn't something to be tackled until after a couple
of years of work on the Primary series: the Primary series already has
some postures that look nearly impossible...

I'm planning to do 30 practises with my current setup (I'm up to 13 so
far), then gradually to add the Primary series postures and the rest
of the closing sequence to build up to the full sequence.  The two
books I'm following are pretty good, as they show a lot of variations
for the more difficult postures.  And as a beginner, you really do
need the variations.  For example, there are a number of postures that
require you to "bind" a foot, which means putting it in half-lotus
position then reaching around your back with the opposite hand to grab
the foot.  I don't quite know whether it's hip flexibility or shoulder
flexibility that's needed for this, but I don't have enough of either
yet!

[kino]: http://www.kinoyoga.com/
[swenson]: http://www.amazon.com/Ashtanga-Yoga-The-Practice-Manual/dp/B004QPUGRW/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=1366648458&sr=8-5&keywords=david+swenson
[birch]: http://www.amazon.com/Power-Yoga-Strength-Flexibility-Workout/dp/0020583516/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1366648502&sr=1-1&keywords=birch+power+yoga