---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
title: "GÃ¶del, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid"
published: 2014-01-04 17:21:28
---
*by Douglas Hoftstadter*

I first read *GEB* about 25 years ago, as far as I can remember.  I'm
not sure how much I took from it then (I was about 16 years old and
knew a little bit of maths, but it was my first exposure to logic and
the theory of computation), although I do remember the dialogues and
all the wonderful Escher pictures.

I picked up a copy again recently as a result of reading an interview
with Hofstadter in *The Atlantic*.  The book has aged really well,
with just a few technological fossils from the 1970s (record players
playing records that they cannot play, for instance).  Hofstadter has
a timeless and almost overwhelmingly fecund imagination, bubbling over
with novel ideas that seem to pop up from nowhere.  His description of
the thought process that led to the construction of one of the
dialogues (each of which is modelled on a piece of Bach's music and
attempts to explore questions of linguistics or metamathematics on a
number of levels at once) gives an impression of a mind of almost
obsessional twistiness, trying to pack as many ideas as possible into
the smallest possible amount of text using puns, structure and
patterns at all available levels.  It's quite wonderful.

<!--MORE-->

I'm not going to attempt any sort of comprehensive review of *GEB*.
I'm not sure that it is reviewable in any real sense without writing
something that's even longer than the book itself (a conclusion that
would doubtless please Hofstadter!).  Instead I want to concentrate on
three things that struck me most on this reading: one on content, one
on form, and one meta-level aspect.

The content that most interested me was Hofstadter's insistence that
self-awareness and consciousness arise directly from what he calls
"strange loops", i.e. self-referential structures in formal systems,
of which human minds are just one example (what else could they be?).
It's a very difficult subject to think about in a reasonable way.  We
all have that sensation of the homunculus inside our heads, somehow
driving us from a seat just behind our eyes, and we naturally ascribe
the same sense of self-awareness to other systems like ourselves,
other people.  But where does that sense of self-awareness really come
from?  There *isn't* a homunculus driving us!  All there is in our
heads is a kilogram or two of glucose-fueled computing machinery, and
yet somehow, from the fluctuations and vacillations of that tissue,
our sense of **I** arises.  How on earth does that happen?  And if it
can happen in our brains, can it happen in other systems?  In a lot of
discussions of artificial intelligence, there is a failure to
appreciate the scale issues at work in this problem (Searle's Chinese
Room is a particularly egregious example).  There are tens or hundreds
of billions of neurons in the human brain with hundreds of trillions
of connections.  How do we begin to imagine or understand what
epiphenomena might arise from that scale of complexity?  Hofstadter
tries to get at this scale problem a little using the example of a
self-aware ant colony called Aunt Hilary, a friend of one of the
characters in the dialogues, an Anteater.

Aunt Hilary knows little and cares less about ants, and the Anteater
even now and then eats some of the ants composing the computing
substrate on which Aunt Hilary's personality runs.  The other
participants in the dialogue where this is discussed are a little
horrified and not a little sceptical, but the Anteater insists that
Aunt Hilary is just as self-aware as they are, and that there's
nothing particularly surprising about the whole setup.  The analogies
**ants : ant colony :: neurons : brain** and **ant colony : Aunt
Hilary :: brain : you or me** are whimsical and a little silly, but
render the central issue of consciousness in real clarity: how can the
collective interactions of a large number of (more or less) simple
elements lead to complex emergent behaviour?

There's much more in this vein in the book, and Hofstadter's
presentation of these questions is extremely engaging.

Which brings me to form.  Reading *GEB*, one gets the impression that
Hofstadter's imagination is not like the imagination of other people.
He overflows with ideas.  The edifices of invention he can create from
a single simple tangent to a single simple idea are often enough to
fill a whole other book.  What's most interesting to me about this is
that this enormous power of imagination is expressed in very
straightforward and readable language, almost casually.  Hofstadter's
writing is clear and simple enough that you could almost imagine that
he dictated the whole book in a couple of sessions, a cup of coffee in
one hand, a stick of chalk in the other, never once needing to refer
to a source or pause for thought.  Of course, the reality is comically
different from this.  *GEB* is a masterpiece of careful construction,
obsessional attention to detail, rewriting, rethinking and reworking.
That the end result reads as such a smooth and seamless whole is a
testimony to Hofstadter's skill as a writer -- the scaffolding that
supported the construction of this marvellous thing has all been taken
down.  In the best traditions of mathematics, there's no sign of the
sausage-making machinery left.  That this was Hofstadter's first book,
completed (and winning a Pulitzer Prize) before he was 35, is rather
extraordinary.

And which brings me to meta.  The copy of *GEB* that I have is a 20th
anniversary edition containing a retrospective preface by Hofstadter,
looking back at the impact that *GEB* had, talking a little about his
career and writing since then, and recounting a few anecdotes about
the production of the book.  In some ways, the content in the preface
is as interesting as what's in the rest of the book.  Hofstadter
typeset *GEB* himself, before this was a normal thing to do (TeX was
first released in 1978, but Hofstadter was writing the book around
this time, and used a different system written by a friend of his).
In fact, he typeset it himself *twice*.  The first set of galleys he
produced faded because of a poorly maintained typesetting machine,
rendering them unusable for reproduction.  So he had to do it all
again.  That did mean that he got to do a full proof-read of the book
from the first set of galleys, but it necessitated travelling back and
forth between Stanford (where he was working) and Indiana (where he
had access to a typesetting machine) every weekend to get the work
done.

He also has some words to say about sexist language and translation
that are very interesting.  In the English editions of the book, the
characters in the dialogues (apart from Aunt Hilary, who never appears
in person, and one other minor part) are all male.  This ended up
being a matter of some regret for Hofstadter (he's written about
sexist language and the "default assumptions" that flow from it in his
*Metamagical Themas* column in Scientific American as well as in other
places) and he was tempted to update some of the dialogues in the
newer edition.  He didn't do this, primarily through honesty, I think,
and not wanting to whitewash a bad decision he knew that he'd made.
However, translations of *GEB* into other languages provided an
opportunity to make amends -- in the French translation of *GEB*, the
Tortoise becomes "Madame Tortue" and in the Italian "signorina
Tartaruga", both of which, to me, sound really good.  The Italian, in
particular, to my non-Italian-speaking ear, sounds like a perfect fit
for the Tortoise's rather tricksterish personality.

Hoftstadter is very interested in translation and analogy (most of his
academic research in AI/cognitive science is about the representation
of analogies and analogical reasoning), and in the preface he says
that he thinks that the best book he has written and the best book he
ever will write is not *GEB*, but *Le Ton Beau de Marot*, a book that
is all about translation (in fact, mostly about the translation of a
single rather short French poem).  I think I need to read that.  (As
well as *I Am A Strange Loop* and *Fluid Concepts and Creative
Analogies*, which is a record of the research of Hofstadter's group at
Indiana University.)

Hofstadter is one of the few people who has tried to stay true to the
early goals of Artificial Intelligence research.  Much of modern AI
research is very instrumental, in the sense that it's about building
artefacts that perform functions that are, in some narrow sense,
"intelligent", without necessarily providing any insight into what
"intelligence" really is.  For example, a lot of AI problems turn out
to be solvable using different forms of search, or statistical methods
that, while they may very well be implemented by some part of the
underlying machinery of intelligence, once you've seen how they work,
no longer seem intelligent.  There's nothing intrinsically wrong with
this, and the solutions and the artefacts that this research produces
are useful.  But they don't tell us a whole lot about what
"intelligence" is or might be, which was one of the original aims of
AI.  Hofstadter has tried to stick more to those original aims,
working on very difficult problems about analogical reasoning and
creativity that try to get at deeper questions about intelligence than
are accessible via more "conventional" AI problems.  I'm looking
forward to reading more about this -- I have a copy of *Fluid Concepts
and Creative Analogies* on my bookshelf already...

In summary, Hofstadter is one of the most original thinkers and
writers on intelligence and creativity that we have.  Everyone should
read *GEB*, even if some of the mind-bending computability stuff is
hard to get through the first time you see it.  It's well worth the
effort, and there are more than enough wild and wonderful flights of
Hoftstadter's fancy to leaven the dough.
