---
author: Ian
tags: AI
published: 2011-11-06 21:15:52
title: AI Class: Teaching the horde...
---
Week four of the Stanford Introduction to AI class was about, well,
what was it about?  It was a bit of a mish-mash.  Some stuff about
logic, some stuff about planning.  Nothing I can really pin some
experiments on, so I've been thinking a bit about the format of the
course instead.

<!--MORE-->

I'm becoming less and less sure that the format that Peter and
Sebastian have chosen for the course works well.  First, the lecture
format (hand written notes, done sort of live) is very susceptible to
errors.  This might be OK in a real live lecture, where the audience
(if they're paying attention) can help to correct mistakes, or can ask
for clarification, but when the audience is disconnected and on the
other end of an internet connection, it doesn't work so well.  I'm not
quite sure why they elected to follow this route, since they have
lecture slides prepared for the "real" Stanford course, which they
could reuse with spoken narration.

Second, production values aren't that great.  Preparing e-learning
materials is *hard* and always requires a lot more resources than
expected.  The impression that I get from looking at the course
materials here is that some consultation with someone who's worked on
e-learning platforms before might have been a good idea.

Third, the "in video" quiz format works fine for quizzes, but it's not
that great for homeworks -- too many errors and ambiguities.  It seems
as though the plan is to use the same format for the midterm and
final, which seems like a recipe for disaster.  I hope they manage to
come up with an alternative.

I know that the course is very much an experiment, and I am 100%
behind Sebastian's desire to expand access to high-quality university
teaching to as many people as possible.  I just feel that the
technical choices that they've made here don't help them a lot.

I've heard from other people that the other Stanford engineering
courses (machine learning and databases) are much more professionally
produced and have had far fewer server issues.  Perhaps that's a
result of the narrower focus and smaller student numbers, I don't
know.

All that said, I don't really buy into the strand of complaining about
things that appears in some threads on Reddit.  My own experiences of
teaching have given me a nice (post-traumatic...) appreciation of how
hard it is to prepare *good* course materials and to really get
through to students.  And that's when the students are right there in
front of you.  What Peter and Sebastian are trying to do is more than
an order of magnitude more difficult.  It's rather tricky to assess in
advance just how much resource you need for a project like this with
open subscription, famous names, and very wide advertising.  Expected
enrollment of around 10,000 students; actual enrollment 160,000.  See
the problem?

I really believe in Sebastian's mission, and if they can carry the
experience they're getting with this course forwards, I tihnk they
could build something really worthwhile.  I'm very happy indeed to be
part of this experiment!

