---
author: Ian
tags: moocs
title: Some Thoughts on the MOOCopalypse
published: 2014-01-31 08:53:53
---

*I was obscurely disappointed to discover that I wasn't the first
 person to come up with "MOOCopalypse".  I think I could claim first
 dibs on "MOOCaclysm" if I wanted, since there are no Google hits for
 it, but it's not quite as good.*

Unless you've been living under a rock for the last couple of years,
you've probably heard of MOOCs (**M**assive **O**pen **O**nline
**C**ourses).  These are courses offered online by universities or
other suppliers, intended to bring high-quality higher education
resources to a wide and varied audience.  I've done a few of these
courses: Peter Norvig and Sebastian Thrun's Stanford AI course, one on
fantasy and science fiction, and more recently
[Jeff Ullman's automata theory course][automata] and another on
general game playing (about which I'll write something once I've had
some time to work on the software I developed as part of the course).

There has been a bit of a hoo-ha about MOOCs recently, mostly because
Udacity, the company founded by Sebastian Thrun (High Priest and
foremost evangelist of MOOCdom, part-time Googler, ex-Stanford) has
stepped back from its original lofty goals to concentrate on
vocational and professional training.  This is obviously a bit of a
comedown: from Opening the Academy to the World to "Introduction to
Salesforce App Development" (the first course listed on Udacity's site
as I write this).

There's been a fair amount of *Schadenfreude* floating around about
this retreat/re-positioning.  When he left Stanford to found Udacity,
there was a lot of high-minded talk from Thrun about the possibilities
of MOOCs that frankly sounded a bit snake-oily.  He appeared very
well-intentioned, and the mission was undoubtedly worthy, but it was
hard to believe that it was really going to work.  Recent events, in
particular a poorly executed attempt to replace some "normal" courses
at San Jose State University with MOOCs, seem to show that this was
all another unfortunate case of "all talk, no trousers" from the
worthies of Silicon Valley.

So what really went wrong?  Tressie McMillan Cottom has done some
great work analysing both the SJSU fiasco and the wider question of
MOOCs -- start [here][tressiemc] and read everything she has to say.
Her analysis is informed by a lot of sociological thinking that I
don't know anything about, and she's spent a lot more time thinking
about these issues than I have, but there are a few obvious things to
say about the whole MOOC project that I'd like to cover.  My teaching
experience is all in physics and mathematics, so is probably of more
or less no relevance to any other field.

First, let me say that personally, I really like MOOCs.  I've learnt
quite a bit of interesting material using them.  But I've had the
benefit of ten years of post-secondary education, plus a number of
years working as a research scientist.  I don't think I'm really in
the target audience for the kind of worldwide dissemination of
academic knowledge that MOOCs have been sold as providing.  After
spending so long "learning to learn", I can teach myself subjects I'm
interested in from books or Wikipedia or even original research
literature.  But I can only do that because I've had the good fortune
to be able to spend so much time developing these independent study
skills.  I also have enough background knowledge that I can usually
deal with infelicities in presentation and can usually figure out what
it's safe to ignore, what I need to do further reading about, and so
on.  These are all skills that it takes time to develop.

The first and most obvious problem with MOOCs involves material
barriers to access.  These come in at least two forms.  If you don't
have easy access to a computer and a fast internet connection, most
online courses aren't going to be usable.  If you need to use a
computer in a public library, it's not going to be practical to watch
3+ hours of video lectures per week and to do homework exercises as
well.  The second form of material barrier is that of time.  Even if
you have access to a computer and internet connection, if you have a
full-time job (or jobs) and/or caring responsibilities, simply making
the time in your schedule to follow a MOOC may be impossible.  I'm an
independent software contractor, which means that I can convince
myself that time spent on relevant (or semi-relevant!) MOOCs can be
counted as continuing professional education so it's (sort of) work
time, but if I had a "real" full-time job, I would find it hard to do
these things.  If I had a couple of low-paid jobs plus child-care
responsibilities, it would be absolutely impossible.  Any approach to
education that doesn't address these accessibility issues is never
going to be universal, and is never going to meet the originally
stated goals of the MOOC movement.

I've almost certainly done a lot less teaching than Thrun, but I have
done a bit, and I've taught in a range of different settings.  I've
done university lecturing in Canada (a second year differential
equations course that was fun for everyone involved, and an instance
of Calculus I that was as painful for my students as for me); I've
done tutorial teaching in Oxford (teaching mathematical physics and
quantum mechanics to undergraduates on a one-to-one or
one-instructor-to-two-students basis); and I spent a few months
teaching maths in a classroom setting in a further education college
in Wales (this was a course primarily intended for mature students who
wanted to return to university to study biology after a period in
work, and was intended to equip the students with the mathematical
knowledge they would need to start an undergraduate degree course).

What did I learn from those teaching experiences?  The first thing is
that lecturing is relatively ineffective as a means of transferring
knowledge from instructure to students.  As an instructor confronted
with a room of 80-90 students, all you can do is present the material
in a fairly conventional way.  There's a constant conflict between
presenting more examples (students in beginning undergraduate
mathematics courses love examples) and going too fast.  There's also
the need to be entertaining enough to keep students engaged with the
material.  You can try as hard as you like to make the material
"relevant" (whatever that means), but the sad truth is that, for
Calculus I, for example, you do need to talk about ten different kinds
of subsitutions for different kinds of integrals, and that is
unavoidably tedious.  And of what benefit to students are lectures
really?  A good lecturer can give a different viewpoint on the
material compared to the textbook, but that presupposes that the
students have the time and inclination to *read* the textbook to give
themselves a baseline for that different viewpoint.

I would have liked to try a "flipped classroom" approach, but that
wasn't really feasible in the setting we had.

So lecturing isn't particularly effective.  This seems to correspond
with what other people find (whatever you think of the "Learning
Pyramid", putting lecturing at the bottom in terms of effectiveness
seems about right).  What about the most effective teaching I've done?
Without a doubt, this was the small group tutorial teaching I did in
Oxford.  In this setting, you have one or two students who've done
some work (in this case, it was undergraduate physics work of various
kinds), handed it in for you to mark, and you meet for an hour or so
to talk about the topic at hand.  I was on the receiving end of this
instructional style as an undergraduate myself, and it can be quite
intimidating.  There's nowhere to hide if you don't know something.
Given a well-intentioned instructor though, it can be amazingly
effective.  If a student doesn't understand a concept the way that
it's been presented in lectures or in their textbooks, the instructor
can explain it some other way, using some other example that might be
more accessible.

It's worth saying that this instructional setting can also be
stressful for the instructor: there's absolutely no possibility of
bluffing -- you need to know the material backwards and forwards and
moreover, you need to know seven different ways to look at anything so
that you choose another angle to explain things if the first few
approaches don't take.  The peak of my understanding of quantum
mechanics was definitely the two or three months when I was teaching
it to undergraduates at St. Catherine's in Oxford.  It's a really
great feeling to see understanding dawn in someone as you explain
really quite difficult concepts to them, adapting your explanations to
your model of their understanding.  It feels like real TEACHING!
That's an experience that's sadly not available in most other
settings.

When I was teaching in Canada, I really tried to push the benefits of
office hours to students.  There were a few who turned up religiously
at every session, and I really think they got some benefit from it.
Office hours aren't quite as good as tutorial-style teaching, mostly
because you have many more students to deal with, so it's hard to
remember what issues individual students have trouble with, but you
can use time at the blackboard with students to try to develop some
problem-solving skills and "learning to learn" and "learning to think"
skills.  When a student asks "How do I solve this problem?", you can
hand them a piece of chalk, sit yourself down and say, "Well, how
would you *start*?".  From there, you can guide them as little or as
much as they need, you can suggest things, you can ask them *why* they
take a particular approach to a problem (and so diagnose
misconceptions that they might have) and, if you do it right (and
you're lucky), you can give the student the feeling of accomplishment
of solving a problem that they didn't know how to solve.

So, what does this all have to do with MOOCs?  Most MOOCs have video
lectures, on-line homeworks composed of multiple choice or short
answer questions (or, in some cases, peer marked written answers), and
discussion forums (which may or may not be monitored by the
instructors).  There may be a recommended textbook (which may be
another financial barrier to entry for some students) or lecture notes
available as well.  There's no space in this setup for small group
teaching or interactive feedback and explanation.  You watch the
lectures, try the exercises, and look for help on the discussion
forums.  If you're lucky, your fellow students or the instructors will
answer your questions.  I'd contend that in that setting, there's
really relatively little teaching going on.

What's more, the resources offered by MOOCs are wholely inadequate for
the claimed target audience.  Video lectures, self study with
exercises and notes and some non-realtime online discussion might be
enough for those of us fortunate enough to have been primed for it by
a lifetime of "in person" education, but for students who haven't
benefited from that, these resources just aren't enough.  There are a
whole range of "soft" skills that are needed: you need to know how to
listen to lectures, to deal with errors by the lecturer, to know when
obscure points can be disregarded until later, to know how to look for
and how to understand further information if the lectures aren't
enough or if you have lacunae in your knowledge that you need to fill
to understand the lectures.  Those independent study skills aren't
things you can teach using the current MOOC model.  Once you have
those skills, MOOCs can be pretty useful.

Which all makes me wonder just what the hell was Thrun thinking?  The
promise of MOOCs providing high quality higher education to *everyone*
seems like a pipe dream.  The students most in need of access to MOOCs
are the students least likely to have the material resources to access
them.  The students who could benefit most from MOOCs are the students
least likely to have the pre-requisite skills needed to benefit from
the limited range of teaching possibilities currently offered by
MOOCs.  It just seems kind of silly to make these great claims for an
unproved teaching platform, one that on the face of it simply doesn't
have a hope of meeting the needs of the people who need it most.

I don't for a moment doubt Thrun's good intentions, but good
intentions don't get you very far.  The SJSU situation, where all of
these difficulties of access came to a head because of an attempt to
replace some conventional courses with MOOCs (with students paying for
them), seems like the result of gross hubris on the part of Thrun's
company, Udacity.  At least Thrun now seems to recognise this.
[He said][fastco], "We were on the front pages of newspapers and
magazines, and at the same time, I was realizing, we don't educate
people as others wished, or as I wished.  We have a lousy product."
It's a shame he and Udacity didn't recognise that before they exposed
a whole bunch of SJSU students to their lousy product.  These things
have real-life consequences for real students and you shouldn't use
students as experimental subjects to help improve your product, which
is what seems to be happening.

One final question that I've been mulling over a little: Can MOOCs
really help with broadening access to education?  Setting aside the
material barriers to access, which are important but not something
that MOOCs are any kind of solution for, what about the other
barriers?  I could parade my ignorance of educational psychology and
pull some ideas out of my hat, but it turns out that there are people
who do actual real *research* on these questions!  If you're at all
interested in this question, you should head to another of Tressie
McMillan Cottom's articles [here][tressiemclinks] and read some of the
links.  There's a lot of good stuff there.  It seems that there's some
hope.  It would be depressing if technology *couldn't* help.  But it's
going to require something a little more subtle than gung-ho
evangelism and "disruption".


[automata]: /blog/posts/2013/12/21/automata-mooc.html
[tressiemc]: http://tressiemc.com/2013/11/19/the-audacity-thrun-learns-a-lesson-and-students-pay/
[fastco]: http://www.fastcompany.com/3021473/udacity-sebastian-thrun-uphill-climb
[tressiemclinks]: http://tressiemc.com/2013/11/15/sjsu-talk-on-the-mooc-moment-ethics-discourse-and-promises/