---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
timestamp: 13:05:26
title: Lilith's Brood
---
*by Octavia Butler*

#### Dawn, Adulthood Rites & Imago

I think I remember reading part of one of these books when I was very
much younger.  I don't remember getting a lot out of it, so I'm very
glad that I reread them again now.  There's a lot to think about here.

The first book of the three, *Dawn*, opens after a global war has
killed the majority of humanity.  The survivors are rescued by an
alien race, the Oankali.  The Oankali are genetic engineers who
combine themselves with other species, collecting genetic information,
ways of living and organisms as they go.  The genetic engineering is
mostly mediated by the *ooloi*, a third gender distinct from the
Oankali male and female.  An Oankali family consists of a male and a
female, ideally closely genetically related, plus an unrelated ooloi.

The urge to connect to and combine with other forms of life isn't
something that the Oankali choose to do.  It's an essential biological
drive for them.  Which leads to a few interesting aspects of the
books, because there's a very real sense in which the Oankali,
although they appear altruistic and interested in the wellbeing of
humanity, are forcing themselves on the human survivors, both
collectively and individually.  (There's also a whole "we're going to
dismantle the earth to make new starships" thing that is hard to
understand give the number of other bodies in the Solar System they
could use, but I'm happy to give Butler a pass on that!)

One thing that makes this a little less creepy is the Oankali's clear
willingness to change themselves to accommodate the species with which
they want to bond.  The Oankali that the human survivors meet are
alien, but not *that* alien -- they are bipedal, they have senses that
correspond at least partially to the human sensorium, they can
communicate by speaking.  They're still alien enough to cause deep
feelings of repulsion in many humans, but people can learn to overcome
that.  Before coming to Earth though, the Oankali looked completely
different, and many of the individuals on their (living) starship
still maintain that earlier body form, which is totally alien and
which would have made communicating with humans pretty much
impossible.  In order to make communication with humans possible, the
Oankali decided to change themselves, to breed children conforming to
this new bipedal body plan, one that they drew from their libraries of
genetic and biological information.

To me, this willingness to mould themselves makes their expectations
and their approach to humanity a lot less problematic than it might
otherwise be.  The Oankali claim to *know*, from genetic analysis and
comparison with other species that they've seen, that there is no way
that humanity can survive in the long term, avoiding another act of
mass suicide, without accepting the modifications and merging that the
Oankali offer.  Whether you believe them or not, none of their actions
contradict that stated belief.

The question of volition on an individual level is also interesting.
When they mature, ooloi seek mates.  Human-Oankali hybrid ooloi
require a male-female Oankali pair and a male-female human pair to
form a family unit, from which they "mix" children.  The way that
these ooloi find human mates initially appears not far from mental
rape, but the more I think about it, the less sure I am.  The ooloi
can, by secreting various pheromones, influence the attitudes and
behaviour of individuals around them, and they do this pretty
consistently to their mates, as part of the ooloi duties of healing
and caring for their family ("duties" is probably the wrong word,
since they just can't avoid doing these things without becoming very
sick).  One thing they can do is to make their mates fall in love with
them, to become physically and emotionally dependent on them.

That sounds really off, and bad news in a
respect-for-individual-autonomy kind of way.  But then I got to
thinking about how love works among humans.  In English, we say "to
fall in love", in French it's "tomber amoureux".  We don't talk, at
least for the initial phase of business, of "building love" or
"climbing into love".  There's a lack of volition, a recognition that
we don't get to choose who we love.  It seems weird, but one way of
thinking of the ooloi-human interactions is as three people falling in
love, one of whom gets to choose.  (In fact, the ooloi usually prefer
to find an already bonded male-female pair, or a brother and sister,
so that there is already a connection.)

Anyway, that may all be way off the mark, but the books are
thought-provoking on a lot of levels.  If there's a flaw, it's that
the view of human relations is too heteronormative.  The biology of
the Oankali doesn't really leave much space for same-sex sexual
couplings, but the Oankali don't ever seem to consider that humans
might be different from that point of view.  That made me a little
uncomfortable -- the Oankali celebrate biological diversity in all the
forms that they find it, but their idea of "marriage" is right out of
the Red States: "one man, one woman <small>(and their
ooloi)</small>".  Oops.
