---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
title: Fatherland and HHhH
published: 2014-03-06 21:43:15
---
*by Robert Harris; Laurent Binet & Sam Taylor*

These two books are tied together by the name of Reinhard Heydrich.  I
can't think of a polite way of describing Heydrich.  He was one of the
architects of the Holocaust, a fervid Nazi, and an all-round total
bastard.  Hitler called him "the man with the iron heart", which gives
you some kind of idea of what kind of a git he was.

In the real world, Heydrich dies in 1942 from injuries sustained
during an assassination attempt by Czech and Slovak commandos while he
was "Acting Reich Protector of Bohemia and Moravia".  In the world of
*Fatherland*, he survives, the Germans win the Second World War and
Europe languishes under Nazi rule, with a sympathetic administration
in the USA led by Kennedy (père rather than fils) providing no
effective check on their activities.  Heydrich continues in his role
as second-in-command of the SS and goes on being as much as a bastard
as ever.

*Fatherland* was published in 1992, so I'm a little late to the party
(for a change).  Alternative history novels set around WW2 are a
popular genre, but Harris does something interesting and different.
He manages to avoid any of the obvious missteps in representing a
Nazified Europe by writing what starts out as a straight police
procedural.  The Thousand Year Reich still needs plods, apparently.
Well, it's a police state, so you do need some police.  The slight
twist is that the Kripo (Kriminalpolizei) was subsumed into the SS in
1939, thus becoming a sister agency to the Gestapo and so under the
overall control of Himmler and his sidekick Heydrich.  Our hero,
Xavier March, wears the feared uniform of the SS, rationalising that
he'd rather do *some* good wearing the uniform than no good at all.

The plot isn't terribly unpredictable, although it's uncovered in
stages, so it's not immediately obvious what's going on.  An upcoming
summit between Hitler and Kennedy precipitates mild discomfort within
the Nazi hierarchy over the Final Solution: everyone in Germany talks
about the Jews "going to the East", if they talk about the Jews at
all, but that's not quite euphemistic enough a cover-up for the kind
of high-level negotiations that are coming up.  Heydrich conceives a
spectacularly brilliant and quintessentially Nazi solution: let's
destroy all the documents (well, that bit isn't quite so typical Nazi,
but this is a serious enough problem that we can tolerate a little
disruption in the paper trail), and murder all the high-level
bureaucrats involved (basically everyone who was at the Wannsee
Conference, apart from Heydrich and the higher higher-ups, of course).
Cue slapstick confusion between Gestapo on the one hand (killing
inconvenient bureaucrats) and Kripo on the other (trying to figure out
why all these fat old Nazis are getting bumped off).

As one might imagine, things don't end so well for March.  At the end
of the book, after a good going-over from Heydrich and his Gestapo
buddies, it looks like he won't be drawing a whole lot of that SS
pension.  However, he has succeeded in getting information about the
Holocaust out (not called that in Alternative Earth Germany, of
course), which will soon lead to widespread condemnation of the Nazi
regime, a breakdown in negotiations between the US and Germany and a
new world order.  You think?  Well, perhaps not.  If experience on
Real Earth is any guide, clear and detailed documentation of
atrocities usually leads to, well, not much.  A stiff editorial in the
Guardian.  Questions in the Lords.  That sort of thing.  Real change,
not so much.

Fortunately, of course, Heydrich didn't survive.  The evil shit died
in 1942.  *HHhH* (*Himmlers Hirn heißt Heydrich*) is real history,
rather than alternative history, and tells the story of how that
happened.

Now, a straight "history of the killing of Reinhard Heydrich" might be
of interest to historians, but *HHhH* goes well beyond that.

Historical fiction, alternative history and "real" history have
something of a funny relationship.  Writing good historical fiction is
exceedingly difficult.  If you write a conventional novel, you get to
choose the plot, the characters, the events you portray, how you
render the dialogue, basically everything that goes into your book.
To a great extent, you can do the same in alternative history.  You
choose a jumping off point where your alternative world diverges from
ours and off you go.  You can use historical characters without
worrying too much about historical authenticity -- who can say exactly
how Heydrich would have responded in any given situation, if it's a
situation that never existed in the real world and thus to which there
can be no witnesses?  You can just make it up.

For a historical novel, you certainly don't get to choose the plot,
and you're constrained as far as characters and events go too.  You
can do what C. J. Sansom does in his Matthew Shardlake novels or
Patrick O'Brien in the Aubrey-Maturin novels and invent incidental
characters to focus on, using the history more as a backdrop than an
integral part of the novel.  That gives you a great deal of freedom to
write what you will while still exploiting the atmosphere and mores of
the period you're setting the novel in to add a bit of glamour.  Or,
you can do what Hilary Mantel did in her Wolfe Hall novels.  This
involves thousands of index cards recording the most trivial of
recorded events in the lives of the most minor of characters of the
period and an effort to weave all of those strands into a sort of
"maximally historical" narrative.  The fact that the Wolfe Hall novels
are successful as novels within these constraints is a testament to
Mantel's genius.

And then there's real history, where you may have to forego some of
the requirements of good writing in order to present the known facts
in sufficient detail to support whatever thesis you want to present.
At this level, you care about details.  Counting the buttons on
uniforms in archive photographs may tell you which factory produced
those uniforms and when, giving insight into logistics and supply.
Trawling through thousands of pages of agricultural production records
may help you to identify a hidden famine.  Of course, you then take
away the scaffolding, hiding the details.  The process of tracking
down all of those facts, the worries that you may have missed
something, the controversies, the lacunae, the not-quite-justified
leaps of logic, all of those are swept under the carpet.

*HHhH* doesn't do this sweeping away.  The scaffolding is there in
plain sight in the form of short "writing of" chapters interspersed
between the conventional narrative chapters describing the
assassination attempt.  It works really well, mostly because of the
worried, slightly paranoid tone that Binet has.  He worries about the
number of buttons.  He worries about what person X said to person Y on
occasion Z.  He doesn't want to say that a certain German officer on
the Eastern Front was driving an Opel if he doesn't have
incontrovertible evidence that said officer really was driving an
Opel.

Now, handled badly, this kind of thing could descend into a sort of
annoying historical pettifoggery that would serve only to distract
from the real story.  Here though, it's handled well, and serves more
to emphasise the malleability of history and the importance of rigour.
On the face of it, whether it was an Opel or a Volkswagen doesn't
matter.  But where do you stop?  If you write, definitively, that it
was an Opel, then some future historian researching German industrial
production during WW2 may take that as evidence that Opel were
producing a given vehicle at a given time from a given factory.  Which
may be untrue.  And which may lead this hypothetical historian to draw
incorrect conclusions.  So that would be bad history.

What makes all this the exact opposite of annoying, indeed incredibly
engaging, is that Biney truly appears to care about the people whose
stories he has taken it upon himself to tell.  Getting things wrong
due to inattention or lack of diligence would be an insult to the
people of Lidice, and to the memories of the Czech and Slovak soldiers
(and many others) who gave their lives in the effort to remove
Heydrich's boot from their peoples' shoulders.

Binet was writing *HHhH* around the time when Jonathan Littell was
being lauded to the skies for *Les Bienveillantes* (in English, *The
Kindly Ones*).  Dealing as it does with the Holocaust, the war in
Russia and other matters WW2-ish, this was of great interest to Binet.
There are some very funny, although eventually unpublished (you can
find them on the web with a little Googling) sections of *HHhH* where
Binet frets about the likely reception of his book after the success
of Littell's book, and he has a good little bitching session about
Littell's slapdash approach to historical accurary.  Slapdash in
comparison to Binet, that is, so probably well within the bounds of
factual accuracy any sane person would expect from a historical novel.
The Opel example comes from this stuff -- Littell talks about some
officer's car and Binet starts to worry that he's missed a source that
describes the car that this (real) officer was driving at the time.
And if he's missed that, what ever else might he have missed?

Now, I thought that *The Kindly Ones* was a brilliant novel, and the
voice of the narrator was really strong and interesting (the phrase
"unreliable narrator" doesn't really do justice to secretly homosexual
ex-SS officers with direct responsibility for the killing of Jews
during the Holocaust living in hiding in France...), but *HHhH* really
is something *sui generis*.  Binet pulls off a great trick, in making
us care about counting buttons (metaphorically) by tying that quest
for historical fidelity to a respect for and love of the people whose
stories he tells.
