---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
title: Twenty Palaces
published: 2013-08-14 13:35:30
---

*by Harry Connolly*

#### Child of Fire, Game of Cages, Circle of Enemies

I have a bit of a science fiction and fantasy habit.  If you read a
lot of SF&F, it can be hard to find the diamonds among the dross.  For
some reason, the sub-genre usually called *urban fantasy* has more
than its fair share of dross, which made it a pleasant surprise to
discover [Harry Connolly's](http://www.harryjconnolly.com/) *Twenty
Palaces* series.  These three novels (plus a more recently published
prequel) hit a lot of the usual urban fantasy tropes (fairly violent,
noirish characters, magic that isn't all ponies and rainbows, a "world
behind the world") but it confounds a lot of others in ways that make
it anything but dross.

All of which makes it hard to understand why these books haven't been
much more successful than they have, and why Connolly has had to
abandon the series for the moment to concentrate on other things.
From what he says, his publisher (Del Rey) was unfailingly supportive,
but the market just doesn't seem to like what he was writing.  He
wrote a [long blog article][cancel] about why this might be, but it
makes little sense -- the most common complaints about the series are
about the things that make it *interesting* and *different*!

One complaint is that the relationship between the two main characters
(Ray Lilly and Annalise Powell) has no romance angle to it.  What the
relationship has instead is a gradual flowering of trust between two
people who are forced to work together, who have very different
perspectives on the experiences that they share (informed by very
different backgrounds).  Romantic entanglement would make no sense for
these two, but what Connolly writes feels like a very realistic and
nuanced treatment of the development of their respect for and
understanding of each other.  I honestly think that the Ray/Annalise
relationship is one of the best things going on in the books.

Another complaint is that Ray uses his *ghost knife* too much.  Ray is
a guy who is in many ways quite ordinary, and who has been shoved into
a world governed by rules that he's only slowly learning.  He managed,
through great risk and not a little luck, to make himself a magical
item.  It's the only tool he has that will work against some of the
foes he encounters, and it's really useful.  Connolly commented that
he thought of Ray's use of his ghost knife as being similar to the use
of a gun by a private detective in a crime novel: that wouldn't seem
weird at all.  I think the ghost knife thing goes deeper than that
though.  It's Ray's one real advantage in what often turns out to be a
fight for his life, and the tension between his need for this tool and
the link he shares with it because he created it, and the threat that
it will be taken away from him (in the rules of the Twenty Palaces
Society, the way he made this thing is a killing crime) makes his
dependence on the knife much more than the dependence of a PI on his
gun.

All in all, I think the series is really good.  Some of the "monsters"
are very imaginatively drawn, there's a bit of (darker than dark)
humour, and the characterisation of Ray and Annalise doesn't get lost
in the sometimes frantic rush of events.  I hope Connolly's upcoming
projects are more successful (I'll buy whatever he writes!)  and that
in time he can come back to Ray and Annalise and the rest of the
Twenty Palaces universe.

[cancel]: http://www.harryjconnolly.com/blog/index.php/its-official-the-twenty-palaces-series-has-been-cancelled-long/
