---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews, mathematics
published: 2011-11-03 17:13:14
title: Mathematics and Logic
---
*by Mark Kac & Stanislaw Ulam*

This interesting little book, published in 1968, is the result of a
collaboration between two of the great figures of 20th century
mathematics.  Although known mostly for his work on the Manhattan
Project and later associated applied mathematics efforts (I first
learnt of his work after being told to read about the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam
problem by my PhD supervisor), Ulam began his career as a pure
mathematician, working on problems in general topology.  (His
autobiography, *Adventures of a Mathematician*, is well worth a read.)
Kac, best known for asking "Can one hear the shape of a drum?", made
major contributions to probability theory.  Kac and Ulam got to know
each other in Poland, then both made the move to the United States
during the Second World War.
 
 <!--MORE-->
 
*Mathematics and Logic* was originally commissioned by the
Encyclopedia Britannica as a sort of long-form article to appear as an
appendix to the encyclopedia.  It was only published separately a
little later.  It's particularly interesting because here we have two
truly great mathematicians trying to answer the question "What is
mathematics?", aiming at the broader scientific community, trying to
give an impression of what it is that mathematicians do.  Mostly, to
be honest, they don't do a great job of answering their question.  The
entertaining aspect of the book is that they seem to have realised
right from the start that they're not going to manage to answer the
question they pose as the first sentence of the introduction, so they
instead embark on a "show-and-tell" voyage through the world of
mathematics.  This ends up working well, and to be honest, it makes
sense.  If you want to learn about a new country, where do you turn
first?  The CIA World Factbook, or something by Paul Theroux?  If you
want the raw statistics, the former is handy, but if you want a feel
for the place, to take in the sights, you want something a bit more
picaresque.

What you end up with here is 105 pages of *examples* of mathematics,
then around 60 pages that tries to synthesise these examples into a
coherent picture of what mathematics *is*, to try to tease out the
essence of the subject.  It's a hard task!  The examples that Ulam and
Kac use range from the very traditional (the infinity of the primes,
the irrationality of $\sqrt{2}$) through the more "modern"
(transcendental numbers & Cantor's argument, for instance) to topics
that would be identified as resolutely modern: groups and
transformations; homology groups; transformations, flows and
ergodicity.  In all, they give a good idea of the vast range of
material encompassed by the word "mathematics" at the time.  This part
of the book is satisfying, although one often feels the limitations of
a short form like this -- tell us the details, guys!  We want the
details!

The second part of the book, I find a little less satisfying.  We step
from the picaresque to the analytic, to try to pin down just what this
subject is.  There are some general trends that are easy to pick out,
but there's no clear overarching principle (probably because there
just isn't one).  The trends:

First, a growth of rigour, rendering the subject more formal and
inward-looking.

Then, axiomatisation: a focus on structures, rules, consequences.  For
example, and as a possible indicator of one path by which new
mathematics can arise, consider the field axioms, originally for real
numbers, and think about how one might apply these axioms to
continuous functions with convolution as the composition rule.  Same
axioms, different structures, different consequences, and hence new
things to think about.

Next, algebraisation, in particular of topology, an approach with
enormous ramifications and many applications.

Then, controversially, the liberation from intuition.  The very
striking example that Kac and Ulam use is the fact that continuous
functions differentiable at at least one point form a set of first
category in set of continuous functions, i.e. they are infinitesimally
rare!  In some sense, "most" continuous functions are like the
[Weierstrass function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weierstrass_function),
differentiable nowhere.

And then we get to the end results of axiomatisation, Gödel's
incompleteness theorem, Turing's work on computability and an apparent
crisis in the fundamentals of the subject.  (Of course, the "crisis"
wasn't too critical: Gödel's work didn't much difference for most
working mathematicians.)

There's some material about the relationships between computers and
mathematics (still only nascent in the 1960s) and relations with other
disciplines.

And then we end.  Does the book answer the original question?  Not as
such.  It *shows* the answer, but this might be the only thing that
it's *possible* to do.  Successful in its aim or not, it's an
interesting book, and Kac and Ulam are charming guides to the
territory.
