---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
timestamp: 22:01:01
title: The City & The City
---
*by China Miéville*

Can you *unsee*?  Can you *unhear*?  If I ask you not to think of a
tiny green rhinoceros wearing a straw hat, can you do it?

<!--MORE-->

No?  Then you might not be welcome in Besźel, or Ul Qoma.  Two cities,
physically entwined, psychically distinct, located at the frontier
between Europe and Asia.  No-one knows how these twin cities,
estranged at birth, came to be.  No-one knows if there are only two.
The shadowy interstitial force of Breach certainly exists in the gaps
between the cities, the spaces unclaimed by the citizens of either
Besźel or Ul Qoma.  So why not a hidden third city?  Or a fourth, a
fifth?  An infinity of fractally entangled citizenries, passing each
other in their shared unshared streets, eyes sliding across the things
that should not be seen, ears filtering out unbidden sounds from other
countries?

And if you have the power to conjure such a place?  What do you do
with it?  If you're China Miéville, you use it as the setting for a
police procedural, with a laundry list of well-worn tropes: we start
with a murder scene, we have the mismatched cops from different
jurisdictions forced to work together, we have mystery and slow
unfolding.  As a stylistic framework for a slow reveal of Besźel/Ul
Qoma, it works well.  The plot carries the process of discovery
along, and Miéville has a light touch with the details of life in the
conjoined cities.

There's a pleasing thread of *restraint* all the way through the
book.  "Restraint" is not usually a word one might associate with
China Miéville: he's not one to shy away from the grotesque, the
bizarre and the weird.  Here though, it sometimes feels like he's
teasing himself and his readers, presenting opportunities to fly off
into the wildest flights of fantasy but, at every step, adroitly
turning away to a mundane explanation.

The only truly fantastic element in *The City & The City* is the
stability of Besźel and Ul Qoma, even in the face of encounters with
the wider world.  Given that, everything else follows logically.  No
angels, no demons, no hidden dimensions, no magic.  Just a social
contract construed under different parameters than our own.

Try unseeing: walk the streets of your town and tell yourself that you
will not see anyone wearing red.  It's hard.  But we know that
unseeing is possible.  We do it every day: the disadvantaged among us
are easy to ignore, our eyes slide past theirs, we easily unhear their
requests for help.  Perhaps with training, we *could* live in Besźel.
Or Ul Qoma, for that matter.
