---
author: Ian
tags: past-lives
published: 2012-02-15 20:18:44
title: PhD Attempt Number 2
---
My second attempt at a PhD went off rather better than my
[first](/blog/posts/2012/02/04/oxford-phd-time.html).  It was all
done, dusted and examined in the allotted three years, without too
much psychic suffering.  Even more remarkable was that, in a period of
four years, both my partner Rita and myself finished, wrote up and
graduated.  Without any domestic bickering at all (well, more or
less).

I put most of this down to the excellent atmosphere in the research
group I was in in Bristol, founded by Paul Valdes, one of my two
supervisors.  We had frequent group meetings, both in the department
and in the pub, there was a lot of good cross-fertilisation of ideas,
and, best of all, the group was full of people I was happy to spend
time with (not at all a common situation for me, as anyone who knows
me will testify).  It was great.  Paul had a super attitude for a
group leader, letting people mostly get on with what they wanted to
do, never coming the big boss, and it worked really well.  The
[BRIDGE](http://www.bridge.bris.ac.uk/about) group is one of the
things I miss most about Bristol.

My other supervisor was Steve Wiggins, in the maths department.  He
was responsible for enormously broadening my horizons in all kinds of
ways.  There are mental states I would never have entered without
Steve's prodding, mostly in the form of late night emails with bundles
of papers attached, saying "You really ought to know something
about this stuff...".  Steve has a work ethic that would kill an ox,
and I don't think he ever missed one of our Friday morning meetings
throughout the three years, despite being head of the maths
department and running an active research group.  I guess someone who
has written five or six fat books about dynamical systems probably
knows a thing or two about time management.  I'm very grateful that he
agreed to take me on as a student.

As for the work I did during my PhD time, well, I started off with all
sorts of grandiose plans, and ended up producing a workmanlike though
not terribly inspiring thesis about nonlinear dimensionality reduction
methods.  I did learn a lot along the way, and the thesis probably
represents only about 20% of the work I did.  Since Paul and Steve
mostly left me to get on with things, I ended up doing *real*
research, i.e. cocking up repeatedly and having to start over with
slightly modified goals and preconceptions.  I think that with more
guidance, I could probably have written a more impressive end product,
but I don't think I would have learnt as much as I did during my
sometimes rather pathetic flailing.

All in all, it was a good time.  I met a lot of cool people, did a lot
of caving, some kayaking, climbed some mountains, and had a lot of
thinking time, something that seems to be sorely lacking as a
post-doc!
