---
author: Ian
tags: book-reviews
timestamp: 17:26:55
title: Holiday Reading #3
---
A couple of more substantial (in length) books I read over Christmas
were Neal Stephenson's latest and the first of Tim Powers' Fisher King
series.  I liked them both.

<!--MORE-->

## *Reamde* by Neal Stephenson

I can't help feeling that, after *Anathem*, Neal Stephenson just
wanted to write something with lots of guns and stuff blowing up.  He
does it very entertainingly, although the gun fetishism is a bit weird
for someone unused to it[^1].  The plot is up to the usual Stephensonian
standards of twistedness, and it's pretty long, although it feels much
less long than any of the Baroque Cycle books, probably as a result of
rollicking along at a rather frantic pace from page one onwards.  The
settings, both real and virtual, are nicely done.  My only real
complaint is that some of the characterisation is a bit
two-dimensional.  The hero of the piece is a slightly enigmatic
man-with-a-past-but-a-heart-of-gold; we have a taciturn former
Spetsnaz man working in "security" (there really should be a place in
the world for novels featuring former Spetsnaz operatives who now make
balloon animals at children's birthday parties); we have homicidal
Russian gangsters; we have an intellectual super-villian (who happens
to be a Muslim terrorist, a little disappointed with the hired help
his pals in the U.S. are able to round up).  James Bond meets World Of
Warcraft via the Washington State Tourist Board, perhaps.

Anyway, it's a lot of fun and it whiled away a few happy hours, but
don't expect another *Cryptonomicon*.


## *Last Call* by Tim Powers

The first Tim Powers novel I read was *Declare*, which is a hard act
to follow.  *Last Call* is good, although I enjoyed it less than
*Declare*, mostly I think because the connection to real history (the
story of Kim Philby, in *Declare*) and the slight twisting thereof is
where Powers really excels.  *Last Call* isn't set around any major
historical events (that I know of, though I may very well be wrong),
but it is connected to some other books by Powers, in particular
*Expiration Date* and *Earthquake Weather*, which form a sort of loose
trilogy with *Last Call*, and *The Drawing Of The Dark*, which is also
related to the Fisher King myth (and, more importantly, beer and the
Turkish siege of Vienna).

One aspect of all of Powers' novels that I've read so far (the other
one I've finished recently was *The Anubis Gates*) is "secret
history".  Well-known and well-reported historical events are given a
new gloss, where the most salient aspects are never known to the
general populace, and the characters in the novels live in a parallel
world (much like that of spy novels) where minor everyday happenings
take on enormous significance.  This otherworldliness or
extraworldliness is at the forefront of *Last Call*: in this world,
the arcana of the Tarot are real entities, Archetypes that underly all
human striving.  Since a regular deck of playing cards is basically
just a cut-down tarot deck, Las Vegas is a centre of power for the
operation of these entities, and for the establishment of the reign of
a Fisher King for the West.  Powers does a great job of depicting the
power of chance and ritual in this world, with some genuinely creepy
moments.  The climax of the novel is entertaining, although perhaps a
little predictable in some ways.

The kind of secret history that Powers writes is very engaging because
it offers lots of hooks for a reader to anchor themselves: fantasy
written in invented worlds can often leave one adrift, without any
points of reference, but once it becomes clear what the rules are, the
real history that underlies the secret provides signposts to help keep
the reader oriented.  The disadvantage, of course, is that it can be
difficult not to stretch credibility.  Not *all* of history can be
*secret* history!  Some things did happen more or less the way they
are reported in the history books, without the intervention of
supernatural forces or other strangeness[^2].

It's a very tempting approach to fantasy writing though, and I look
forward to reading more from Tim Powers.  (I'm slightly stalled on
*Expiration Date* at the moment, as it's not quite grabbing me, but I
read *The Anubis Gates* in about three sittings.)


[^1]: Stephenson comments that he needed the services of a "ballistics
      copy editor".  There really are a lot of guns.

[^2]: This is something that *Declare* does breathtakingly well: the
      *secret* secret history is hidden behind the everyday secret
      history of espionage and counterintelligence, and the book
      draws us slowly into the deeper secrets by way of the more
      mundane ones.
